Good morning everyone.
Firstly, just to say
congratulations, Nick, on your new appointment.
Thank you. Uh, welcome to the committee.
Um, for those of you,
and I'll always say this just ahead of our hearing, if any,
um, of the group spokespeople, uh, speaking
to a particular question, please come up
to the microphone rather than speaking sort of on the way.
'cause otherwise the speakers won't pick it up.
We might hear it, but no one else will.
Um, and you're welcome to sit on the end seat there.
Um, don't feel like you have to do musical chairs
unless there's sort of three
or four people that need to change over.
Um, otherwise we are here for, uh, the education
and workforce Select Committee hearing
or briefing on 24 25 Financial Performance
of Immigration New Zealand.
Uh, we have the structured agenda that you've got in front
of you, uh, as is often the case.
We're fairly relaxed in terms
of the exact minutes and times.
Um, I'll manage that. All questions are through the chair.
Mm-hmm. Including Aries.
And, uh, otherwise really we're over to you.
And if you'd like the time at the beginning
for introductory remarks, then we'll hand over to you
to introduce and thank you very much.
Great. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Uh, great to be here this morning.
Um, uh, so yeah, I'm Nick Blakely.
I'm the, the new, uh, executive of, of, uh, MB great
to be here in this capacity.
And I'm joined by Alison McDonald.
I'm Deputy Secretary for Immigration.
Uh, and it's, this is her last session
'cause Neil Allison's retiring.
Um, so, uh, she's very keen to answer as many questions,
Um, and, uh, general manager of, um, immigration, uh, policy
shaki, and we will bring, um, others in, uh, as well.
Um, mm-hmm. So the government has a strong focus on economic
growth and immigration has a, a really core part, um, in
that, whether that's bringing in skilled workers, uh,
filling, um, shortages,
supporting tourism international students,
or just facilitating investment in New Zealand.
And during the last, um, financial year, uh,
across the system, we've delivered an active program across
both policy and operations.
And just to give you a few
of those highlights on the policy side, um,
implemented changes to the active
and visa, uh, active investor plus Visa in April, 2025.
Uh, and so far that's resulted in more than 500
applications, totaling 3.4 billion, uh,
and one of one billion's already invested
with another 2.3 expected in the next six months.
Uh, we've implemented a parent Boost visa,
which I know this committee has, uh, asked us, uh,
many questions about before to allow parents to spend, um,
longer with their children in New Zealand.
Uh, we'll put in place two new seasonal work visa pathways
to help businesses access the workers they need
during peak periods.
Uh, and we began a 12 month trial in November for the China
and Pacific Island Forum countries to make it easier
for visitors from those countries
to visit New Zealand if they hold
an eligible Australian visa.
And this has had a big uptake.
We have, uh, more than 54,000, um, request approved
so far since November with over 36,000 already arrived.
Um, and, uh, over 80%
of those travelers said they traveled here specifically
because of that new option.
Mm-hmm. And so that's, uh, you know,
having some additional economic impacts that we'd estimated,
you know, over hundred million so far.
Uh, and one of the outcomes we've seen from the earlier
policy changes through 2024 in the, uh, approved employer,
um, credit employer work visa,
A WV was the big shift in the skill level
of workers coming in.
So before those changes, about 40% were in high school roles
and 6% in lower school roles.
And now that's 85% in high skilled
and just 15% lower skilled.
So, um, successful, uh, changes there. So that's the policy.
On the operational side,
we've had a firm focus on improving our service delivery
improvement processing times in our three
main visa categories.
Average time to get a visitor visa students
or the work visa has reduced between 30 and 50%.
Uh, for the employer work visa, it's now
around 15 working days, um, for employer accreditation
to three working days, job checks, three days,
and visitor visas at five working days.
Um, we're really pleased, uh, to be able to, um,
have those results and
that's been achieved while maintaining the decision making
quality, um, and, uh, managing risk.
Uh, and unsurprisingly, they've been received well
by businesses and sectors,
and we have seen customer satisfaction have an upward trend.
Uh, in terms of just the numbers.
In 2025, it was 13.4 million border movements
that we helped, um, facilitate, uh,
1.6 million New Zealand electronic travel authority
requests, 470,000 visitor visas, 97,000 students, uh,
43,000 accredited work visas.
And, and there's plenty more as well.
Um, as with many countries around the world,
we're seeing an increase in the number of refugee
and protection claims,
and we've increased resourcing
to manage those processing 1300 claims last year compared
to 900 the year before.
Uh, we successfully prosecuted, uh, 16 people
for breaching immigration laws last year,
and we issued 151 infringement notices to employers
for less serious offenses, uh, totaling over 500,000 fines.
And then finally, we're making the longer term changes
in investing in our own systems
through our future services program.
And this is really about, um,
getting off old legacy risky IT systems,
but then creating efficiencies and productivity
and actually improving the experience both for our own staff
and for um, customers.
Uh, and in August, um, last year,
the student visa was the first category, um, as part
of the program to move on to, um, our system adept.
Uh, and that did see our customer satisfaction lift from 74
to 86% following the, uh, um, implementation.
We've got more of visa categories scheduled
to go live, um, later this year.
So there is always more work to do in immigration,
but, um, we're really pleased
with the progress we are making.
Um, we take our role, um, seriously,
and we, we do the best that we can.
But we thank you for your time
and look forward to answering your questions.
Wonderful. Thank you very much.
So our first part is, uh,
questions on financial performance.
And I already have a question lined up from Lawrence,
and then it looks to me like Phil after that.
So we'll start with Lawrence and
Then Thank you Chi.
Thank you so much for coming. Um, uh, I have, uh,
I have one question to start
with on this particular section,
and that's in relation to the immigration.
Um, I think it was the fiscal sustainability
and system integrity act now that was released.
And one of the things that he was introduced was not so much
of a levy, essentially a new tax.
If you're looking at the, the definition of the difference
between a levy and a tax, um, that is gonna be placed on,
um, people who are both applying,
but people who are also accepting,
let's say international students
or, um, those who are credited employers in order
to support the health and education system.
How is that going to work when the levy
that you collected is not under INZ or MBS control?
Well on that? Um, so yes, we've got the minister now,
we now have those new powers.
Um, we are working through
and understanding, um, what, you know,
looking at, um, whether, so when that power, sorry, when
that car came in, it wasn't, you know,
and the minister was clear, we are not sort
of exactly looking to, um, implement it immediately.
Um, I mean, one of the things
that I would say about it is at the moment, you know,
we've got a system where we do collect levies and, and MB
and Immigration New Zealand takes that role.
Those are only levies that are charged to migrants.
And you know, the rationale
and reason behind introducing this power is to give
that ability to look at other kind of users of the system
who do, um, kind of incur cost to the system, um,
to be able to charge those.
So like you say, education providers can say are a
beneficiary of it, um, employers, um,
and, you know, uh, other people like, um,
NZ ETAI think as well,
What what it just add is that these are genuine costs
to the system and this is the, um, perennial and,
and immigration is that you are trying to, um,
facilitate entry and try
and help, um, people who wanna come here
or businesses that need workers when you are also trying
to manage the cost to the New Zealand system.
And so those broader costs was not something
that we could levy for, um, before this,
but they are genuine costs coming from the, um, system.
And just on your point about, um, you know,
the beneficiary might be elsewhere in government,
we've got existing mechanisms to look at.
Um, what's the best way of allocating that?
You know, the, um, uh,
international visitor levy in the tourism system, um, has,
uh, is funds things across,
you know, conservation and tourism.
So that's collected by immigration.
So in terms of working through the detail, I thank you.
I understand that, you know, it's something that is there
to have clearly implemented immediately.
Mm-hmm. Um, but in those kind of cases,
is it already said on what proportion of that is
to be retained that new levy, what proportion of
that should it be implemented will be retained by INZ
and what proportion of that will be distributed?
The other, the international levy,
there's a goal wholesale onto Tourism New Zealand,
whereas this particular one,
is it gonna be a hundred percent going into other
areas? Is that the idea? All
Those details haven't been worked through, like you say.
Okay. With the international visitor levy, that's,
that is split between, um, the tourism portfolio
and the conservation portfolio and,
and the investments do quite different things.
Okay. Um, so that, you know, though, that that level
of detail, this hasn't been Thank you, bill.
Yeah, good morning. Morning. Um,
I'm keen for you to help us understand, uh,
what's going on with the visa, um,
memorandum account deficit, which has seen, uh,
a $70 million deterioration over one year
and, uh, $152 million, um,
deficit forecast.
Um, were there revenue assumptions that, um,
proved to be Mm,
Yeah, so there were, um, so there's three things
that we've been very closely looking at.
Yep. Um, because of that performance, um,
I mean if I take us back to 2024,
which was when I did the last fee
and lever review, that was quite a significant
change for the system.
I mean, you, you may be aware that prior to 2024, um,
we were 78% fee and levy funded.
And then at that point we made the switch to go to
ministers decided to move to 91%.
Mm-hmm. Now when, so that immediately shifted costs into,
um, into the memo accounts.
Mm-hmm. Um, and so at that time we did the fee
and levy review and, you know, our active management
of our memo account for they trend
to zero over time is really dependent on getting two things
and doing two things really well.
Um, the first is great forecasting or good forecasting,
and the other is putting the cost in the right place.
Um, and so at that time, uh,
there were a few other things in place.
So I'll come back to the forecasting.
So thinking about that time, um, there were a couple
of other things which, which did also push into deficit.
So one of the things that we did sort of expect
to happen was we had a big one off surge in applications
immediately prior to our new rates coming in in October.
And the other which pushed, sort of, sort of moved when
that revenue had come through.
And the other thing was, um,
we had some additional costs going in as part of the,
our future services program.
So that was a sort of, you know, that's our investor save,
uh, upfront costs that'll be pushed into the accounts now,
which will sort of come out and, and even out over time.
And then the third thing,
as you mentioned is our forecasting.
And when we've dug into that, um, we are pretty clear that,
um, that there were three things going on there.
The first was we did have a set assumptions, which we,
when we look back and with the power of hindsight,
we think we're over optimistic. Um, so on
Revenue or What was that on revenue?
On revenue On revenue, yeah.
So in terms of the volume,
so the revenue is highly sensitive to changes of volumes.
And what we saw at that point in time was we expected sort
of volumes to keep increasing
or at least stay stable as how they were
immediately coming after COVID.
And, you know, and, and they didn't, um, that
that's not something that is necessarily particular
to us in New Zealand when we've talked to our other, um,
counterparts that they've had a similar experience.
Um, and so, you know, we have a program of work to really,
um, you know, the continuous improvement
around our performance on forecasting.
It's a, you know, it's, it's become a really important part
of how we manage the system.
We, we are definitely building, you know, our capability
and around it and,
and looking at, um, where we might have relied, uh, very
sort of, um, had a a a big focus on
what historical trends are.
We're building out our capability to understand well,
you know, impact of policy change.
'cause that's gonna change, um, volumes, what is the impact
of the broader economic, um, conditions
that, that change as well. Mm.
So, um, our, the information
that we have shows the 2026 unaudited forecast
of 152 million deficit,
but I, I presume you've got numbers that go beyond
what are your projections say?
So, um, so our projections are looking at that, the,
the memo account continuing to be in deficit.
Mm-hmm. Um, and so, you know, we are, we are working
with the minister providing advice on different, um,
options, you know, as part of our, you know, sort
of regular work.
Um, we had a fee and lever review in 2024.
Our next program review, uh, is 2027.
So we'll be doing work over the course of this year to start
to, to, to look into that more further
and look at different, at, at different options.
So, um, the, the last review, um, led
to pretty massive increases Mm.
In levies and fees. Um,
and, uh, this is showing a substantial deficit.
Mm. Um, what's gonna change to get it back into balance?
Um, well, um, a couple.
So we are very super conscious of, um, of what it means for,
for fee and levy increases.
Um, there's a couple of touchstones that we always have
as part of our work on that.
Um, the first is understanding how we compare
to other comparator countries.
And so in the last fee and levy review, we baked in a sort
of assumption around stay within about 90% of
what Australia have because we know, you know, the, we,
we are in a competitive market.
Um, the other is, in the time since that review,
we've done quite a bit of work looking at, at
what the behavior has been to, to understand what the
elasticity of demand is.
And interestingly enough, you know what, what we found out
of that was a 1% increase in our fees actually had less than
a 1% change in demand.
That doesn't mean, of course, that you just increase fees,
uh, right across the board.
And we are really conscious across the broader picture,
you know, how this fits in with charges
that might be changing for, um, you know,
customs or transport.
Um, so, uh, we, so we, so we are kind of building in some
of those assumptions and we would look at that.
Um, the other is, you know, really, um,
managing, obviously on the expenditure side, you know,
what are we doing to, to, to keep those costs down?
Um, and as we probably will get in a little bit, um,
more today sort of thinking about, well, some of those
investor save, what are the sort of things that we are doing
to to, to maintain our costs.
Um, and then finally, I might just sort of say that,
you know, we are continuing to, to really understand
and dig in where should cost be attributed.
Um, so, you know, we talked about the new, um,
new new powers, but, uh, looking at making sure that, uh,
where we have costs in the system, they are going to the,
the people who pay that.
Can you give me a number on your projections
for 20 27, 28?
Uh, I don't know. We've
Got that in front of us at the moment,
but it'd be fair to say that the current trajectory is for,
you know, for ongoing deficit without a change.
Yeah. In the, in the settings
Larger than the Current.
Uh, I, I don't have those numbers in advance,
And this is the review of 24, 25,
But I think that Sure. The broad point
Is what they're doing about it now.
Yeah. So, so the broad point is that we need
to look at both the revenue and the expenditure side.
So as Sean said, we do need
to continue looking at the expenditure
that's not just the future services,
but that's our ongoing efforts
to find continuous improvement.
And then on the revenue side, that would be the fee.
And then there's also the volume side.
As the economy picks up, we might well see volumes start
to exceed what we might have expected.
Um, well, you know, this is the nature of forecasting, um,
that, uh, you know, we do our best,
but obviously, um, all forecasters get it wrong.
It's just, uh, can, can we ask for your,
your out the out year projections?
Can you come back to us that that's, yes, we can do
That. So I've got some supplementaries
first from Vanessa,
then Carl, then Ji. So we'll go in that order.
Yeah. Um, thank you. Um, how sensitive, uh,
immigration New Zealand's, um, financial position to global,
um, events?
Like are we, is it vulnerable
to what's happening in the world? Yeah,
Yeah. I mean, AB
absolutely. Um, the, you know, tourism numbers,
for example, um, do get driven
by what's happening in other countries
and the economic impacts on those, uh, other countries.
Um, that's, uh, and workers
and the, um, you know, the, the, from the workers side, um,
businesses needing to work, bringing workers will be
heavily affected by the economy.
And I think that's been one area Sharm was saying where, um,
being, uh, the,
the lower economic conditions over the last few years has
surprised us on the downside, as we like to say.
You know, it's been, um,
it's been a tougher than we expect. Yeah.
And what we have found too is,
and this is where we're pushing in to get much more granular
with our forecast, is the composition.
So it's not only the changing number,
but it's, it's those different visa categories.
Mm-hmm. Um, so for example, you know,
our residents categories, um, they are higher charge,
um, a lower volume when those change that,
that has an impact.
Um, on the other, um, sort of scale of things,
visitor cheaper, um, uh, the volumes can
increase, but you know, it won't necessarily
change the Okay. Overall picture.
And I, um, I noticed that your, um, the,
basically the productivity, um,
and processing has increased sharply
and costs haven't gone up usually in comparison.
So that's a really great thing.
Um, how much more, um, if you like, um, efficiency,
do you think you can get out of that?
Is that, have you got to the point
where you've done as much as possible?
Or how much more is there to come?
I wish I was retiring saying that I had, but,
and there's always continuous improvement work to do.
But, um, uh, through our future services program, there's,
um, there's some, it as, as we use, uh, technology
and move onto the adept platform
and start to use, um, analytics platforms for our risks,
we will get faster and more efficient.
Mm-hmm. Um, while keeping the quality and the risk up.
And we do a lot of work in terms
of the teams are doing continuous improvement,
and we're finding all the time
that we are making a, a big difference.
That's why we've gone from, so in skilled residents, which,
um, charm was just talking about, you know, we used
to have an average of one per day is now 2.5 per day per
officer, and it's really complex work.
Yeah. Um, and that in the main has been done
through staff working through processes,
improving processes,
and working with, uh,
the immigration industry in particular.
Mm-hmm. So we've done quite a lot of work
with licensed immigration advisors, um, on what we can do
to improve the process between us.
Mm-hmm. Including in Hamilton, in our office, um,
they did a trial with licensed immigration advisor
around using the phone rather than writing out.
And now they're, um, 40% of applications now are dealt
with over the phone, which used to be a prolonged
so longer for the customer to wait.
So those sorts of things will carry on in the
organization. Yeah.
And that kind of reflects into the costs
and, um, around the financial import performance as well.
So Yeah, it does. How
Much of, um, that have you already factored into the
financial projections?
We've, we've factored in the, uh, savings for the, um,
debt program for future services.
We haven't quite got to
how we'll calculate on the continuous improvement
because we are continuously improving
and getting faster all of the time.
But as we do that, we're assessing the benefits and,
and there will be further going forward.
I think it's really, um, important to note that,
that a large part of the immigration system has fixed costs.
So even where, so for example, last year we,
our efficiencies were such that we managed to, um,
reduce the, the, um, the, uh, headcount of our,
of our resources of by like a hundred people.
But, but that really is my only variable cost.
Almost everything is an IT cost,
But you to, to the point you're making is there's more,
um, up or there's more potential for us Absolutely.
Within the baseline to make savings.
Right. Thank you, Carl.
Thanks, chair. And I think continuing on the same theme,
do you think that that work is happening fast enough to get
to a point where, as your forecast
and reality change mm-hmm.
'cause you make the point, Nick, rightly, that
that is always gonna be the case you're able to, uh,
more quickly respond to remove, um,
and or, or over forecasting, um, versus actual.
So I, I think the, um, well, maybe I'll start with, uh,
Allison's point about that.
It's a high fixed cost model.
So there are some variable costs,
but actually it's quite a high fixed cost model.
So the real, um, savings come in from being able to, um,
reduce that fixed cost, which does go to your technology,
your underlying processes, efficiency,
which is why we've gotta focus on that.
Are we going fast enough? No, I mean, we, we're going
as fast as, as we can,
but I, I do think there's some potential for us
to look harder at some of these, um, savings
and I'm, I'm wanting to do that, um,
with the team, um, over the coming months.
So we have a, you know,
we haven't got something baked
into the forecast at the moment.
You know, I would like to see us, what can we, um, uh,
realistically add into the forecast in terms of savings?
So that's something that I do want us to look at.
Um, but, uh, then the other bit
where we do have flexibility is, is on the people side as,
um, as volumes change
or there's a shift in, in where the pressure points are, um,
the team is able to move resourcing to where, to,
to manage those pressure points when they come in.
And, and they do actively manage that.
So that's the main sort
of flexibility we have to manage demand.
Um, but the real game is trying to to,
to reduce the underlying fixed cost structure.
And I, I take the point on fixed cost being a big part of
the way the model works.
When you look at the way you undertake, uh, your work
and you look at how it happens internationally,
are there any opportunities to challenge that thinking
and say, well, you know,
it shouldn't be such a big fixed cost base,
or there's other ways of delivering the outcome
that enable you to be more agile.
I mean, you might wanna, you, you have lots of it.
What I'll just say is, um, uh, that being able to, you know,
use automation, use ai, use these sorts of tools,
which are becoming, you know, much more prevalent mm-hmm.
We've got a lot more capacity to use those.
And that does allow you to reduce the fixed cost page,
which, which allows you much more flex to, um,
to expand when demand grows without just being
reliant on more people.
But you might wanna talk from your
international conversations.
Yeah, I mean, we work very closely across the five
migration countries, um,
and compare our work benchmark things all of the time.
So one area we've been working on particularly,
which we might have an opportunity
to talk about at some point, is, um, asylum claims,
for example, because we've seen a,
a huge increase in asylum claims, um,
since the board has reopened, as has everybody globally.
Um, and the work that Fiona and her team have been doing.
Um, yes, we put some more resource in there,
but actually the, the work they've been doing have been
streamlining processes working with U-N-H-C-R to make sure
that we don't breach our obligations under the convention,
but yet we still are faster.
Um, and it's not just about efficiency, uh, for us,
it's the person at the end, um, particularly
with asylum claims where it's really important for people
to get a decision as soon as they can.
So, lots of work going on.
Thank you. Um, we have a, can I just check,
we've got a supplementary question from je,
so it's supplementary, not a new primary.
Then we've got a supplementary from Lawrence,
but then the next primary is from Lawrence.
But Grant, you also had a supplement
I, we've got on this topic. Yeah.
Okay. So, so according to je, so does she,
and so does Lawrence, I'll have you afterwards. Sure. I
Don't have a new one anymore.
Oh, okay. Perfect.
Well then we'll move on to Punji. Thank you.
Um, so my question is about the revenue.
So, um, your report forecast revenue increase in 2026,
uh, to 238, um, plus million dollars,
which is up from 179, um,
$0.748 million in 20 24, 20 25.
But you have made comments about the savings just now
answering those questions.
So, uh, just want to dissect this a bit.
So the revenue is going up
and do you know why, I mean,
where is this additional revenue coming from?
Is it because you made a comment in your opening remarks
that there are some new visa categories
going live later in the year?
I mean, I just want to understand
where is this revenue going to come from,
but then also want to understand
the comments you made about saving.
That means the cost is also going to increase with that.
So if you could just elaborate on that please.
So the, the rev on the revenue side, um, the, you know,
the, that might have been our forecast at the time,
which may not be eventuated.
I you might have the specific numbers on
the, the, the next year.
But, um, I think that's the, that's part of the issue is
that revenue hasn't, um, uh, been realized at the level
that we were hoping it would've been.
Um, on the cost side, uh, the,
the core costs have been effectively,
or a little bit of a slight increase
for some small inflationary s but not very much.
There has been a bit of front loading of cost, um,
for the future services program.
So like in most programs you have some upfront cost,
which is then realized over time
as the efficiencies emerged.
So we are in that, uh, cost upfront phase.
So from the appropriation side,
I think it was about a $50 million
increase in the appropriation.
Um, a little bit of that was inflation, most of that was
for the future services,
but that's then being expected
to being paid off, um, over the
Coming years. So in
short, you're saying that, uh, you will not be able
to meet that forecast,
Um, from the, from the revenue side? That's right. Yeah,
From the, from the revenue side.
That's right. And so, uh, how do you tie this
with the employment, uh, rate?
Is it, uh, is, is this like a factor
which might be affecting the revenue?
Like, I just want to understand what are the reasons
behind that you're not
Able to forecast?
Yeah, so, and I think that's where we are.
We are really kind of unpacking, unpacking all of that.
So I think, like you say, you know,
what's gonna affect our forecast, you know, we have, look,
we look at historical trends
and that has been the way that we forecasted in the past,
but now we know, you know, we, we need to sort of, um,
do more and lift our game in terms of understanding,
you know, the wider economic conditions like say, you know,
are there, uh, job creation, um, opportunities, um,
understanding that global, um, kind
of picture both domestically, uh, yeah.
Um, sorry, internationally, you know,
what are the push and pull factors.
Um, part of it as well is policy change.
So when we, um, did the last fee
and levy review, you know, since
that point in time we've had a, IP come in,
we've had skilled migrant changes,
we've had the new seasonal visas,
they weren't baked in at the time as well.
So, um, yeah.
So a lot of different kind of, uh,
moving parts at the same time.
And so, um, yeah, through our kind
of continually improving our forecasting is about
With more categories, I would imagine the revenue would go
up because like people are,
there will be like more opportunities for people
to apply in different
Categories. Well, there's
more things that they can apply into. Yeah.
Sometimes you have the case where, um,
an actual fact you kind
of end up substituting between can mm-hmm.
I mean the, the seasonal visas might be a great example.
You know, in the past we had a policy
and we've still got some people coming through A EWV.
Now they've got a different route.
Um, you know, but the, the
Overall revenue, I mean, revenue's driven
by the big categories.
Mm-hmm. The, um, you know, visitors work students. Yeah.
And so the volumes are down in those then
that will have a big material impact.
These, the newer categories, you won't have a,
as a material impact as those three big ones.
Okay. And, and, and by far the the dominating factor was,
uh, um,
our forecasting on a WV and that being out.
Okay. Yeah. Thank
You. Thank you. Um,
so can I go to Lawrence
for the final supplementary on this line
of questioning and then we'll move on.
So, oh, and then grant, sorry. Okay. Not the final. Um,
So this actually follows up on what the questions
that Vanessa asked previously.
Um, in terms of the levy and good to see you Alison.
Um, when it comes to working
with licensed immigration advisors, for example, what are,
what you are hearing in terms of the impact of the increase
in application fees, student visas being one
that has drastically increased, um, over the last, uh,
few years and other visa types have on the people
who are applying and ability for people
to apply for various visas?
Have you heard or surveyed to community to see if,
what is the feedback has been whether that has made, uh,
an impact on the number who are applying? Mm-hmm.
I mean, I speak regularly to their license immigration
advisors and their, uh, representative bodies.
And I haven't had much on fee increases for some time.
Obviously we had quite a lot when the fees went up. Yeah.
But I haven't heard much.
And actually the stats kind of bear out that in the main,
when we compare to other international immigration agencies,
were around, around the same ballpark in terms of trade.
So nothing recently. Okay. Great.
Good to know Grant. Oh good.
Just add, I do think actually we had quite a lot of that
good feedback on the N-Z-E-T-A
for Chinese and Pacific travelers.
'cause that's considerably cheaper for them. So
That's fair. Right.
Thank you. Yeah, thank you.
Um, just actually I, if I recall rightly, um,
from previous interactions, one of the things with,
with the people that you've employee, you were up,
you were skilling so they can move between the categories.
Yeah. How has that been working?
'cause in terms of that fixed cost
not having whole lot people there
and then suddenly the demand shifts
and they haven't got the skills to shift.
Yeah. How has that been working for
Them? Yeah, so increasingly,
uh, we are getting into a better
and better place as people come onto new in debt system.
Yeah. So we're trying not
to make people move too, too much between systems.
Sure. So over time it will get better and better,
but um, already as we've moved people onto a adapt,
they're able to do more than one category.
Yeah. Um, and as we go on
and as we go into a kind of skilled migrant for this year,
we'll be training up another load of people.
So it's, it's given us an amount
of flexibility we've not had before.
So a good example is student. Yeah.
So now I have students done in three different sites. Yeah.
Um, and they were previously done in one site.
So we've been able to kind of, uh, make sure
that markets are well covered.
We've gone through this student peak, um, remarkably well
for a new IT program
because we've been able to move the work around.
Right. And, and, and do you see that as something ongoing
To really help that Yes. At your
Base base Costs?
Yes. Fixed cost. Our base cost
and the satisfaction of our staff.
Yeah. Yeah. Because, you know, the,
the new IT program program over time will take more
and more routine work away.
So actually it's a much more enjoyable job
for our, our people too.
Good point. Thank you. Great. Line
Question, question team. Very
good. Uh, Phil, new primary question.
Um, future services part two on the agenda. Yep.
Yeah. Are we happy to, can I just acknowledge,
sorry Roberto, I know you've sub down. I'm
Happy to move on to the next time. Right.
Don't worry. Alright, we will move on now
to part two then.
Well done team. Um, go for it, Phil.
So, um, what was the original business case estimate,
cost estimate for future services?
I'll get that for you. Okay. Yeah.
Um, and, uh, how much has been spent for date?
Uh, we're I, I can get
that figure as well before we leave.
Um, but we are underspent this year, um,
on the program so far.
But I'll get figures for you before we leave today.
Okay. And, um, can you give us a sense of the percentage
or share of the visa categories
that are currently paperless now?
Well, it's, um, paperless in terms of our volumes, it's
around 50% I think.
Or just no, 40 something percent.
Sorry, I'm being a bit vague.
I'll get the number of that as well.
The original business case was 336 million,
but that was over, over eight years was the original.
Yeah. Um, and I'll get the figure for this month, this year
so far, but we've underspent, um, on the program
'cause we've kind of gone quite cautiously into
our first big product.
Um, and we haven't spent
quite the amount of money we thought
We would. So. So
in terms of the overall rollout,
you're underspent to date to
Date for this year? Yes. Yeah.
And how many years are you into the eight year
transition? We are one
Year in One Year. Just the first
year. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
And you're at 40% plus in terms of visa volumes paid?
Yeah. 'cause we had volume, we had
visa volumes go on before.
So visitor was our, our big category.
By the end of this year, we will have had our group visa
group visitor visas on as well.
And the partners of workers that will take us up to the,
the bulk of our up to almost 50%
of people will be applying through a adapt.
Okay. Um, but just to remember that most
of our other services are online as well.
They just don't use aep.
So actually in terms of paper,
we don't have very many people on paper categories
because by volume they're quite small.
Right. Um, RSE is probably the
biggest one that's still on paper. Right.
Interesting. And, um,
do you have any quantifiable productivity gains from
the progress so far?
Yes, I do. I mean, I think I've talked
before, which is what put us into the business case on some
categories like permanent residence.
Um, we, which we had to do
because we had so many people come through on RV 21.
Um, we were four times faster.
We don't expect to have that sort
of gain on a category like student
'cause it's quite a complex market.
And, um, we're a few months in and through the peak.
So we are just now above the productivity
that we had previously. I can get you the figure,
The business case, um,
was premised on a 30% productivity increase
for complex products and a 50% increase
in non-complex products.
That was what was assumed in the business case based on the
experience of some of the previous ones.
Yep. And, uh, it also assumed
that there'd be a dip in productivity as new, um, uh,
as new things came on Yeah.
That would then recover and, and improve.
And as Alison said, we've, we've gone through the dip
and we're now, we're
Now coming back out. So
we are on, uh, for student 3.5 is our measure
and we're up to 3.9 in the last month per person per day,
but quite a, quite a complex time. Um,
And Allison, you mentioned you,
you've got gone a bit slower than in terms
of taking care and the rollout.
So what are the, what's the assessment
of the risks associated with the rollout
and what mitigation strategies are these?
Uh, so I think that the, the biggest risk for us was
that we wouldn't learn enough lessons to go because,
because eight years is a long time mm-hmm.
And technology moves on. Yeah.
So a big risk for us is
that the world would move on before we'd got through.
So what, what we've done
and why we've kind of slowed down slightly is to understand
what can we reuse from what we learned on student
to build future categories so we can kind of, um,
spread basic loads across every student category.
I was being a bit, trying to think of a simpler way
to do it, but, so we reuse modules each time rather than
create each visa separately.
The, um, so there's the technology side,
then there's the people side.
And like any large technology project,
the tech's only part of it.
Actually, what's much more important is the change process
with how they work.
And so we've really, um, um, looked hard at how we,
how we bring people onto the new cland, how we bring our,
um, our staff through that
and involving them in the process, trying
to learn the lessons from students so that, um, people can,
uh, see the benefits and, and get up to speed quickly.
So that's been a, a key area of focus
for us to manage that risk.
Yeah. And bringing providers in as well.
So making sure that providers,
the students are involved in the design
and we get lots of feedback from
them that we are working through.
Mm-hmm. Um, how has the, the, um,
the transition to online, uh, around visas, uh, how has it
to, uh, or,
or has it delivered functionality
that actually provides a better experience for
the Visa applicant?
Like, you know, the page where you can see the status
of your application going down.
I mean, are there other other things like that, that have,
uh, made the whole thing more transparent and engaging
And Absolutely. And,
and as, as Nick said, um,
our customer satisfaction has gone up, um,
with every product that's gone onto a depth
so both people can see where their application is.
And that's meant less people having
to call the contact center to find out where they are.
It means that, um, agents
and applicants can, can, can check their progress.
Also, the upfront front, uh, form is kind of designed
to make sure that we ask the right questions for
that applicant, so we're able to tailor things more readily.
Whereas, uh, quite often in the past, somebody would apply
and then we would, there'd just be a piece
of information we'd need to go back out for.
We need to do that far less so it's much quicker.
Um, so there, there are lots of benefits. Thank you. Yeah.
Right. I have a, a supplementary from Vanessa
and then we'll move on to the next primary.
Uh, it's a, uh, basically
what you're running is a long-term, um, IT project.
Yeah. Um, and they, uh, have a bit of a history
and public service not always delivering.
Um, are you assured that the governance
and, uh, all of the kind of user experience
feedback, all of those things are soundly in place as well
as, um, you know,
having reasonable timeframe implementation.
Have you got all of those good measures in place so
that this doesn't become a failed project over time? Yeah,
Yeah. So
very mindful, very mindful of, of this across government.
So it was, um, looked hard at the, um,
the governance arrangements with, uh, included, um,
two external members on our governances committee.
Um, both of whom were involved in the IR business
transformation at different phases.
Um, one who was heavily involved in the MSD, um,
transformation that's underway.
So trying to, uh, learn the lessons from that
and keeping that as a, as a watch.
You've also got, um, independent quality assurances,
gateway processes, um, with, uh, that are,
I find very useful as a test for how you're going.
So we've drawn heavily on all of those things
and in designing this,
and while it's an eight year program, it's, uh,
split up into phases.
The first phase is only one year, you know, it's based on,
um, particular products.
So we're not trying to do everything at once.
We're trying to do one and learn for the next one.
So all of those are ways to try
and de-risk the projects so we can learn over time.
Um, and then we can shift.
So, you know, the, the, the idea was the first year
and we'll do a reassessment,
in fact in the coming months about does the program still
look like the same for the rest of it,
or based on what we've learned, do we need to do things?
Great. That'd be Great.
So now supplements instead of your primary year. Great.
Go for it. Um, just with respect to student visas,
have, have you struck any real pressure points that have,
um, that have caused any issues of holdups with the,
with students coming through
that you can say we we can improve on that?
Yeah, because I,
I've had a little bit of feedback in that space. Yeah,
I, I've had a little bit of feedback too.
Yeah. I just reassure you not as much feedback
as I've had in previous years, which is a great, great.
I had a very quiet Christmas, which was unusual.
So, um, but what the adept system allows us to do is
to filter much more readily and quickly.
Mm-hmm. So we ask students if they possibly can
to apply three months ahead of their start date so
that we can ensure that we get the visa done in time.
And so we make sure that we have a priority list, um,
when things get really tight,
which they do at this time of year.
Always. Yeah. Before start dates.
So we're able to sift applications to make sure that people
who applied within that three month recommendation they are
prioritized degree
and above are prioritizing people whose
start date can't be moved.
So that's most of the universities,
that's some of the PTs as well.
So if their start dates can't be moved, we're able
to pull 'em out and prioritize them.
Um, the, a debt system allows as well to when we find, um,
risk and we have found risk as we always do in the market,
it enables us to group, um,
like-minded risk factors much more quickly so
that we can get that to a specialist unit who, who then work
through the risks so we can go faster with students.
So I, I, this has been from my side, both in terms
of feedback and actually in my phone ringing, um,
the most successful year to date.
So yeah. That's great.
That's great. Great news. Thank you.
Um, For our next primary question is from,
And just seeing clarification from the chair,
this is in relationship to the compliance team.
Mm-hmm. Um, would you rather me fit
this in part two or part three?
Um, And the operations of the compliance team?
It's kind of like, I feel like it could fit in either. Look
Honestly, I'm happy for it to go wherever I look as long
as you are aware of
what the question nature of the question is.
Okay, great. If you'd like to ask the question now
That's, thank you. Over the year that we
are reviewing. Mm-hmm.
Um, would you please outline us, um,
how you've currently been operating in relationship
to the request for identification from people
who may be liable for deportation.
Would you be able to run us through those steps?
And I'm also interested to know, I guess, what the size
of your compliance team is Yeah.
And what you're working with at the moment.
Thank you. I'll just invite them
Steve Watson to, to Join.
Thank you so much. General manager of our compliance area.
We're gonna go straight to Steve. Yeah,
Sure. So you, your
question I, sorry, I was coming to the table.
Your, your question was around the op, how,
how we operate when requesting information from
People identification cation from people
who may be liable for deprecation.
Yeah. And particularly over the period we're reviewing
Course. So, and,
and currently, um, we are able
to request identification from people who we,
who we believe are liable for deidentification.
Um, we, What we would do before,
before undertaking a compliance visit is do a a significant
amount of research to ensure that we knew
who was likely to be at the address.
Um, and we would have some
bio biographical information via data information
that would help us identify the people there.
Um, and then when we have, uh, gained entry to the address
or been invited into the address, we would then start
to talk to people and, um,
request the information from them.
Um, and if we, uh, if they refused
and we, we genuinely believed
that they were the person we were looking for, we can, um,
request more information formally. Mm-hmm.
Would you normally trigger section 3 1 0 C of the act
to the 10 people if you are not able
to get identification at that point? Or do you rarely
Use that provision? We would rarely use
that provision if we
could not identify them.
Thank you. And as a follow up, when you're trying
to establish whether to, you know, make a visit,
for example, um, do you go off having just, um, like,
you know, would need evidential basis to go and visit
or just kind of like that you would just suspect
that someone makes
No, we, we need to have a, a, um, a reasonable grounds
to believe that that, um, the person we're looking
for is there, we do a significant amount of work
to, to verify that.
Um, and that that includes understanding
who else might be at the address and,
and what we know about the address.
Um, and one of the, one of the reasons we do
that is obviously to, because our staff are going, uh,
visiting, um, either a residential or an
Work, what's the size of that team that, for example,
is part of the compliance team and can do visits?
There's, uh, currently, uh, round about 70 staff is
We'll take across the country. Across the country.
Yeah. And that includes people
who will do the visits themselves? That's
Correct, yes. Cool.
Um, I, I've got more stuff than that,
but just let me know when you stop me.
Okay. No, look, I mean, I'm happy for you
to have additional subs at the moment.
We've got a record of about five supplementaries. Okay.
As long as, As long
as their supplementaries are not
new primaries. 'cause otherwise we have
No, that is Okay. Um,
You have a supplementary, What kind
of training do you provide to the people doing the visits
to make sure that, um, they're complying with the rises
of people who you're visiting
and sort of how often do you do refreshers around that?
Like, would you be able to run us
through some of that please?
I, I can. I've got, I've got some basic details
and I understand that you have made some written,
written questions that will give you
a bit more detail on that.
Um, but I'm happy to answer those questions now. Yes.
Um, so we, we provide, uh, deescalation and staff safety
and tactical training to our staff once a year.
That's aimed at, uh,
obviously sometimes tension arises on these visits
that's aimed at diffusing that tension, reducing the level
of, um, of, of kind of tension
or risk in the room, if you like.
Um, so that's, that's done, uh, twice yearly
with the refresher annually.
Um, and compliance staff also, uh, when they are prior
to warranting, they receive a lot of training on,
on their human rights obligations
and their international obligations.
Um, and that's what we call a core competency
and we have to refresh that annually.
Um, and we also do some significant training on,
on understanding how to deal with, with different people
who have different vulnerabilities.
It's a really, really important part of,
of our operating procedure that we understand
who we are going to see and
who else might be at the address.
For example, uh, part of our standard operating procedures
for, uh, visits is understanding if there are elderly or,
or children at the address
because we, there,
there's obviously a particular sensitivities
and we deal with that in a, in a different way.
Um,
And in the period we're reviewing finally out
of the detentions, how many des have you had to make
and have they, where have they been made, like in a home,
um, workplace or elsewhere in the community? Like,
I'm not unable to give you the, uh, breakdown of the
between home and workplace, but we can get that for you.
But, um, I do have the details, the number
of detentions we made,
Or I guess maybe have you ever had to make a detention
outside of like the workplace or homes like in, like
In the public, for example?
Uh, occasionally when the police, when the police do a stop,
the police will, will, um, detain a person for us
and then they will, um, return 'em to the police station
and we'll take action there.
But I'm not aware of any circumstances
where we have actually detained people in the street. Okay.
Thank you. So do you have the number,
Uh, While he's finding that number?
Yeah. We can, um, confirm the other number on
Paper. Yep. Um,
in the year 9% of our volume is on paper
And we're at 39% on their debt system
and, and, and so, and
List on remaining softwares
On different legacy platforms.
So that's the aim is to get them all off that. That'd be
Fascinating to follow up on that in a year's time,
just to see how that's progressing.
Yeah. Great. Can I, oh, sorry.
I'm sorry. I don't have that dashboard in front of me,
but I do know that we can
produce that, provide that information. We'll see if
We can get through and we'll make a note if,
if you can't get it by the end of the meeting.
Great. Um, follow up supplementary from Palm Sheet. Thank
You. Um, so
this is about the target that you had
for deporting people in, uh, 20 24, 20 25,
1,500, which is like close to double of 20 23, 20 24.
So it's like a quite as in my view,
it's like a quite an increase in the target
that you had set.
Um, so I just want to understand
what was the reason behind that?
And the second part to my question is that, uh,
that wasn't met.
Was it because you could not reach to enough people
or were there other factors and
or the information that you had to set that target,
you couldn't validate that information.
So if you could Yeah. Help me understand that.
I'm not sure it's an actual targets, I think it's more
of a estimated number primary. So
There is, there is a, an estimates target
of 1500 per year target.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. Um, and we haven't met that
for the last three years, although we have over the,
over since 2023, we've, I think it's increased
by about 400 a year.
So last year we, we met just over 1200.
Um, the things are,
the international travel, uh,
arrangements are post COVID were difficult,
but that's not a problem anymore.
There are other problems that affect our ability
to get flights costs.
Um, the things are a little bit more complex, um, but we,
but deport, deporting the right people, um, aligned
to our priorities remains our focus.
And, and we, we always strive to, to do the right work and,
and make meet the target.
I think it's worth saying, we've been looking at
that estimates measure because it doesn't necessarily, uh,
it's not necessarily a measure of success.
A measure of success for us is to helping, helping people
to regularize their position.
And so Steve's team
and my team work really hard all year round to make sure
that people who become unlawful know what they need to do
to become lawful or to leave the country.
The vast majority of people when we write
to them, leave voluntarily.
Yeah. So, so just kind
of reflect the whole spectrum of the work.
Just, just on that.
So that last year was just, I think it was about 1,213,
um, uh, deportations.
In addition to that, uh, compliance engaged
and case managed a further, about 600 people
who we were able to put back on track who were, uh,
through the section 61 process, were able
to be re put back on a, on a, on an immigration pathway.
Um, which I think is a good outcome
because they, they, they have become unlawful,
but through tardiness or whatever number of reasons,
but through really careful case management and,
and understanding their, their personal circumstances,
we were able to Yeah.
Respond to. So this, uh, what you're saying is
that doesn't mean that you could not reach
to that many people Mm.
But it's just that that many people were not deported
because they were put on some other pathways.
Yeah. That the correct interpretation. Yeah.
And what about the first part?
How did you decide to just double that target, uh, from
what was actually achieved in 2023? So
The, the target has always been 1500,
or the estimates measure that, you know, that's,
that's our estimates that we are
obliged, contracted to meet.
Um, we have things, things have got easier post COVID
and, uh, we've focused, um, on
a lot more voluntary deportations where people have,
take control of things for themselves so that, you know,
they, they, um, have have self deported, which,
which is really helpful.
Um, and we've just, we've redone our priorities
to focus on on some different things.
Like our number one priority will always
be criminals who are in prison.
They, you know, they, they must be deported.
Secondly is people who have criminal issues
and have, have character issues who also, um,
should be deported.
And, and the third priority is
around people who've got failed, uh,
exhausted all their avenues of appeal.
And so we've done a lot of work with them
to kind of encourage them to leave.
Um, and also, uh, we, we have engaged with a lot of people
because we've, we've had a strong focus on employer
compliance and employers who employ, uh,
people who are unlawful.
Um, and we may talk about that a little bit later,
but, um, you know, that that has, has led to us, um,
finding a number of people who are Yeah. Who we will.
So, final on this one. Are you able
to provide me a breakdown of countries, uh,
where these people were from, those who were deported?
Yes. We have, um, we, we, we can provide you with that.
You can provide that, that table fine. Yeah. Thank, that's,
That'd be available. Thank
you. We'll circulate that afterwards. Yeah.
Topic, Uh, new topic. Okay.
Well, I'll go to, Phil's got a supplementary on that.
And then we'll move on to your new topic
Afterwards.
Why do you have a performance target for patients?
Doesn't that call into question the
integrity of the process?
I mean, we don't, surely we don't have a performance target.
People don't pay their taxes. Yeah.
They should be subject to a compliance process.
If people break the law,
they should be subject to a compliance process.
Why have a performance target for it?
Why not just if it's an estimate, follow the law. And
I, I, I think this is, this is why I was
sort of reacting to the word target.
'cause it's an estimate to measure.
And as you know, for each appropriation, you have to have a,
a measure of the activity in that, in that appropriation.
And given that this is one of the core activities,
that was the measure that was chosen.
I think what Alison was saying is there's a question about
whether that is the right measure,
because it does, um, doesn't give a holistic view.
So I, I I think your point is, is well made.
And you're saying that we're actually,
We're looking at it. Look
at, yeah. Yeah. Great.
So now I've got a new primary question from Phil,
and then we go back to Ricardo. So Phil, over to you.
Yeah. I just wanna go back to the, um, biometric
and identity system mm-hmm.
Upgrade. Um, the, there's been a number of reports, uh,
we understand, uh, independent reviews
that have warned about delivery risks.
Mm-hmm. Um, and I wonder if you could tell us
what the key risks, uh, are that were identified, uh,
and whether any milestones have slipped in
implementation so far.
Uh, yes. So the,
the original identity program has been going for some time,
as you know, and I think I mentioned earlier,
and this is our risk with adept as well,
technology moves really quickly.
Um, and so, uh, the system that we were building, um,
there were risks around delivery.
And it's such an important part of the immigration system
and the integrity of our system.
So we need to be, well,
you can never be a hundred percent sure with an IT program,
hey, but you need to be as sure as we can be
that it's not just fit
for identity measures now, but fit for the future.
So, um, the, the original program,
we still have an identity program,
but we're, um, morphing is the wrong word,
but actually we're working with DIA
and others about what does New Zealand need
for identity going forward.
And we think that there may be a better
all of government solutions.
So we are kind of exploring that as well.
So that's why it's taking so long. Mm-hmm.
Um, because it's such an important part of the system,
Why haven't the full review reports been
released publicly? Well,
Um, I don't know actually why they haven't been, uh,
because the reviews have just kind of been of the program
as we've gone along to help and guide us.
So we haven't actually needed
to have a public review as such, but,
Well, why don't we look in into that?
Yeah. Um, and as, um, Alison says, we're in the process
of working out what the program looks like going forward.
So it may be that once some
of those decisions are made, we can
release some. And if you
Could cover mention on that.
Yep. Thank you. And just to, for the committee members,
uh, our secretary, just make a note of the things
that we've asked to follow up on so we can communicate
that if you're unsure of what we've agreed to as we go.
Okay. Thank you. Right.
So, and new primary question from Ricardo.
Thank you very much. Um,
I have received feedback from the Mexican community on the
recent working holiday visa, uh, platform.
Mm-hmm. Um, there have been reports from the community
around, uh, basically people being completely unable
to log in to apply.
I understand the system often is sort loaded
and there's challenge to that.
Mm. But this year, um, compared to previous years, mm.
There's been significant challenges inclu,
and we've also seen reports that the URL, um,
failed an extra number.
You could have logged in
and people were selling that length
for substantive amount of mon of money.
Have you heard reports of this or reports of challenges
or system failures when it comes
to the working holiday visa application
Platforms? No, I mean, it's
an old platform that we use
and, um, as you can imagine, every time a category opens
for a country, everybody piles in.
So it's not unusual that if we have overload,
there's there, uh, slow issues.
But I haven't heard, and I'd be really interested in the
details you've got of potential fraud in that market.
Uh, how, how old are we talking?
And if you've been aware that these platforms are old
and there's a humongous search in demand, not just
for the mixing community,
but actually across any country
where there's a limited
quota compared to, say, the United States.
Why haven't you done any work to modernize that platform?
Yeah, if you already know, there's often a certain demand
once the application open up. Yeah.
Well, we'll be putting it onto the AEP platform.
So there's a, there's a limit.
You, you know, when we talk about costs
and we're really conscious of public money when we know
that it will be going on to adapt, um,
we've managed the problem.
I mean, I say problem, that's the first I've heard of
that market, um, this year.
Um, but it, it's kind of, do you want
to spend money on updating a system
that you're gonna get rid of in a couple of years
and value for money for the public?
It's, it, we, we'd rather go onto the debt platform.
Cool. Great. Okay.
Uh, next primary question from Carl Bates.
Thanks Chair. Uh,
and I think this relates to around service delivery.
Um, what's your approach been in terms
of facilitating times, um,
or during times of conflict where people
with temporary visas that have been expiring can't leave,
um, New Zealand because of that conflict
or travel disruption?
And we've got a kind of a standard process in place.
'cause unfortunately in the time I've been in the job,
there've been a few, uh, instance
where people haven't been able to travel
back because of conflict.
So we've, uh, invoked that recently for the Middle East.
So we take a very facilitative approach for people
who are on shore with temporary visas that are running out.
Um, we encourage them to contact us.
We've got, um, information on our website.
Our partners are putting out information on social media
platforms to urge people to contact us,
and we will take a facilitative approach
until they can travel, we'll extend their visa.
And we're also conscious we have, um, you know,
we've a number of people in the country, um,
who will not be able to go home and, um, for some time.
So we'll work with them
and their representatives
to keep 'em safe while they're here.
And how effective, um, has the response time
and engagement with those individuals
being from your perspective?
From my perspective, good.
I mean, contact center times haven't blown out.
Um, and I think, uh, we've been able to deal
with every query that we've had so far. Yeah.
And sorry, last up, um, chair
and if I'm one
of those individuals who's been affected Yeah.
By travel disruption or conflict. Yeah.
Um, would, would I be very clear on what my position is
through that engagement with you?
Or are there gray areas,
or is it, as I say, clear, I know where I stand? I think if
You're on a temporary visa, uh, it, it's really clear
that if you contact us, we will help you
and we'll make sure that you stay until you can travel,
that you can stay lawfully in New Zealand.
And we've sent out instructions to all of our staff
as we do, although they're pretty experienced
and they've been here before,
but reminding them to take that approach
for anybody whose visa is likely
to expire and they can't travel home.
And, and that's actually quite a number of people
who are transiting through the Middle East as well,
not just people heading to the Middle East.
So we do expect quite a few people to be impacted.
Yeah. Thank
You. Uh, supplementary
Ric. Yeah,
Just a couple of subs on that.
Um, I have looked at your advice on the page.
For example, right now in the information you've got on the
people affected by the war in the Middle East.
Mm-hmm. You've given people two options,
which contradict one of the things you just said.
One of them is to apply for another temporary visa mm-hmm.
Or basically go to a Section 61.
Um, talking to lawyers, they told me this is basically just
the status quo and that the one difference
that they've noted is that you'll just be
more lenient with documentation.
Yeah. You just told us that until they can travel Yeah.
We will extend their visas.
Um, are you saying that if somebody is on, say,
an accredited employee work visa that visa's about
to expire, they can just call the, like,
immigration New Zealand number
and they'll receive an extension almost, you know?
No. Like, you know, ev ev
Every case is individual, but that's,
But you've just given, given a certain sale
until they can travel, we will extend their visas. So
I, I'm talking perhaps I'm, I'm,
I'm definitely not trying to mislead you. Um,
Would you be able to clarify The
Bulk of people we've had so far are people who were due
to fly and weren't able to fly
and were able to extend their vis to Visa.
Yeah. So Far just
consider Visa so
Far, but the advice on the website tells 'em to contact us
and every case is different and we will look at it.
I just use this as an opportunity to remind everyone
that obviously we are having to transcribe this.
And it would be very good if we could let anyone finish
what they're saying, both members
and officials, whether you agree
or disagree, wait for people to finish a sentence
and then move on to your question or answer.
Thank you. Um, great.
So have we got any further questions on part two?
Because you've got bids for questions on part three
and I'm happy to move on if everyone's ready.
Brilliant. No objection. We are now on part three.
Um, just acknowledging, um, to those
that are having a look at the, I'm just a little bit, um,
confused myself on when we've agreed to take a break
because our agenda, structured agenda says a break now.
However, our agenda as a committee says a break at 1215.
So both, right. So
Break now is fine.
Pardon? A break Now is fine if people want it. Yes.
Yeah, so perhaps we'll just take a short break, um, sort
of proposing 10 minutes
and come back at, um, 10 15 if we're all happy.
All good. Then we'll move on to part three. Brilliant.
You're up. Are you ready? I think so.
Don't sound enthused. Right?
We are back online and live,
And we're on to part three, which we are covering, uh,
delivering an efficient, capable,
and resilient organization.
I know we covered a couple of little points on
that in part one, but That's okay.
It's where our agendas go.
Um, we have two primary questions from Phil,
but we'll start with one of them.
Sure. Um, and over to you. Yeah.
Uh, so our advice tells us that, um,
envy reduced its workforce by 391 full-time equivalents,
6.3% reduction.
Um, how many of those were within Immigration New Zealand?
Um, in the last year? Yep. Uh, just over a hundred.
I think. I'll get the exact number for you.
So that's a, that's a net reduction in the
organization's overall.
Yes. Okay. And which operational areas were affected?
Uh, mainly Visa operations.
And that was mainly because the
efficiencies, um, that we've made.
I think, um, I mean what, what we're doing
and over the course of the future services program is we're
looking to try
and, um, question absolutely every
vacancy in the organization.
Yeah. So, you know, we,
we don't wanna be in a position we know kind of
where we need to get to in terms of costing,
and we're trying to, to take, um, opportunities
where vacancies arise if we don't need to fill them.
So it's mainly been in Visa operations.
And, um, has there been any discernible impact
on workload per officer?
No. Well, uh,
productivity per officer is what's enabled us
to make those changes.
Mm. Um, but I mean, I, I don't expect people
to do anything more than a day's work for a day's pay.
And, um, uh, are you able to assess the, in terms of, um,
let's take compliance for example.
Yeah. Um, uh,
has there been any impact on the capacity mm-hmm.
Uh, as a result of the workload re the,
the workforce reductions?
Um, I mean, we look at
where our resources are all of the time.
Um, we've actually moved some resources.
So even though in, in addition to the resource, um,
reduction that we've been able to achieve,
we've also moved some resources.
So for example, for um, employers, we've moved, uh, a number
of people over to Steve's team who was here earlier to,
to take a, an infringement action on employers who, um,
don't treat migrants as we would
expect them to treat, be treated.
Um, and so we can do a whole kind of regime.
But in terms of compliance activity,
I think Steve has told you he has,
he has a team working on a priority list
who work really efficiently and effectively.
Um, so, uh, it's kind of in the same vein.
Yeah, that's right. So put your in, go.
Hey, in the response to written questions, um,
you told us about 61 roles just established and 60 created.
Was that part of one, uh, uh, discreet piece of
Re Yeah. For, for one
piece of restructuring? Yeah.
Tell us about that. I believe
that's in the international, isn't
that associate deputy secretary hoping?
No one's reminding me, but that's the
one I can, that comes to mind.
Mm. Because, um, we, we've been trying to, as I said, uh,
take, take, uh, attrition
where we can rather than restructure.
But there was one part of the organization,
which is the associate deputy secretaries,
where we made some changes just
to tighten up on things like, um,
our international deployments, our international relations,
putting everything into one place.
So as the workforce has grown again offshore, um, for risk
and verification and for processing,
I had operational managers dealing
with transferring people out
and what some parts of the world and risk managers,
and actually I want them to their core business.
So we're moving that all into one international unit.
So that was, it was really just a move around of resources.
Um, sorry, Alison, you didn't quite so follow that.
So, um, it was about consolidating, right?
That wasn't, that wasn't one, wasn't that year.
But yeah, we've only really consolidated, I can't think
of a change program right, per say,
but I will check back over them.
Sorry, I'm not sure which one that relates to,
but it can't relate to the one I've just talked about,
so I'll find out.
But it wasn't, it, it was a discreet, uh,
restructuring Oh, right.
With a particular purpose.
Yeah, it was. So
The one has just reminded me it was
to create the chief operating officer role
and make sure, so as I, one of the other things I've tried
to do in the organization is to move, um,
everything other than looking
after frontline people, off managers
who are out managing in the front line.
So we have a chief operating, um, officer unit
where we do all of the kind of, um, dealing with process
improvement, taking that off the front line, dealing
with media inquiries.
Um, and so it was a restructure of
that group to make sure that we had
The team around the, of The team. Around C
Yes. And that's approximately
60 positions,
Approximately. Yes.
Right. They do a huge amount of work,
though it sounds like a big number,
but when you see the volume
of stuff that goes through there,
Um, right. And it's
not frontline operational stuff. It's taking,
It's totally supporting the frontline.
Right. So the frontline, um, previously officers, um,
who were managing staff in offices we're having to deal
with, you know, verifying, um, information that was going
for written PQS for, um, OIA requests,
looking at process improvement, um,
across a range of things.
And we've taken that work off them. Mm.
And it's in this team. Okay.
Alright. Good. Um, I have a question about, um,
what you've said earlier on the efficiency
and, you know, obviously moving through some
of the programs into a depth and,
and that work, you talked earlier about increasing
quality, reducing risk.
Yeah. I, I'd love you to explain how,
you know, mechanically you've done that.
'cause it's kind of easy to say Yeah.
And then in advance,
'cause you might wanna answer it upfront supplementary
question about where AI comes into that. Yeah.
Okay. So it's,
Sorry. And just acknowledging,
I did hear your point about kind
of lumping the, the risk into a bit of a group
and having that done by a sort of a specialist team.
Yeah, yeah. You know, how that looks, I guess. Yeah.
A lot of what's enabled us to move kind of iteratively
to make sure that we do speed and quality
and risk has been specialization of teams.
And since border reopening, rebuilding our risk
and verification network offshore, they do a great job
to make sure that where we have high risk within markets,
they, uh, give us information to know where we need
to look at risk.
They uncover a lot of fraud rings.
Um, they do a huge amount of work to make sure
that our risk profile is always up to date.
And that's what helps us to manage our risk profile,
um, as well as we do.
Um, uh, and then alongside that, in terms of quality,
we've done a lot of work in terms of training our people,
um, but also trying to, uh, refine the process so
that we don't trip people up along the way.
Um, and a lot of that work has been done working
with licensed immigration advisors as well
and helping us to understand
what quality looks like from the customer's perspective.
Right. Not just from our perspective.
So it's, it's, there's no silver bullet.
It's been really hard work, um,
by specialist teams who've worked on quality, on risk,
and within, um, our, our training environment, uh,
releasing time for our people leaders
to really help their people, um, to improve their capability
and get the training that they need.
So it's lots of different iterative steps in terms of ai.
Um, the risk analytics platform is a machine learning
platform that we were building and
that will give us huge efficiencies going forward.
Great. So, um, when an officer is assessing risk, it comes
through with a risk rating
and there are a number of places they
can look for information.
This will produce a much more accurate real time, um, piece.
So that will be a really big piece of machine learning.
Amazing. And I, I
Was gonna say, that's built into the,
our future services program.
Yeah. So that's part
of effectively automating the low risk mm-hmm.
Guess the low risk ones that we are looking
to use that model for.
Yeah. Um, so that's, um, in, in, um, in the course
of being developed at the moment.
Yeah. But, uh, there are other opportunities for AI
that we we're exploring.
So, you know, one, the number
of government departments have looked at is AI in
the contact center mm-hmm.
And being able to, um, you transcribe calls,
summarize calls at the end.
That's something we're, um, exploring.
Um, another big area that we want to look at
and is around, in fact this in the program too, is, uh,
what's the relevant information for this case?
Uh, and it could be on the call
or the relevant information that helps me.
So, so feeding information as our staff to help them, um,
have the information at their fingertips.
So that's another key area that we're looking
At. I'm sorry.
And we, we are doing some very, uh,
constrain contained trials within Immigration New Zealand on
how we might use AI to, to more accurately, um, forecast
is one thing, um, how we might use it,
um, in a number of different ways.
But we're trialing them to make sure that they're safe and
before they go out and all, all of our staff,
all the staff in MB have, uh, access to basic AI tools
to help them do things like make sure
what they're saying can be understood
by someone other than an immigration expert.
So there's all sort sorts of ways we're just using it. Yeah.
And, and I guess that that brings me to my next sort
of supplementary, I suppose, is
that behavior management versus the customer experience.
Mm. Because I know a lot of us, as,
as electorate mps get immigration requests
through our offices all the time.
And the primary thing that, at least I hear, I assume
that would be the same around the country, that it sort
of goes into a big black hole Mm.
Um, in terms of knowing where you are in the system. Yes.
Um, and so naturally I assume you'd be addressing those
issues, but can you see a way out Mm.
That isn't adding to the workload, so we're sticking with
that efficiency Yeah.
That might lean into AI to help keep people abreast
Ex. Exactly. And that's
one of our trials is how could we do,
while we're waiting for people to go into the a depth
system, how, why, how might we automate updates
to people just to Yeah.
Even if it's just to say we've still got it.
Great. And then, and then I guess my final point on that,
as you touched on earlier, the, um, you know, student visa
and the fact that if, if they're getting
that three month window, that, that it's all okay,
but of course, naturally we get all of these pieces
of feedback from the, from the applicant Yes.
But also from the, um, institutions, whether it's, you know,
vocational or university.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, how can you see,
and have you got a program in place?
Mm. Um, have you done work on managing that Yeah.
Behavior knowing that people will inevitably leave it
to the last minute 'cause they think
that it's just gonna be an immediate Yeah, yeah. Process.
Yeah, they will. I mean, we've tried with, in terms
of information out to people,
the providers have done a really good job
as well in doing that.
But we do still have a lot of people who apply late and, um,
and so what we're trying to do is, one, get faster mm-hmm.
And, um, speeder in that,
but also give really good information to the providers.
Yeah. Um, because that, that's usually the first point
of reference for a student.
Yeah. And I've seen a couple lately
where actually I was talking yesterday, I'm really proud
of the team and the analytics they can
get out of the Adep system.
So two, two letters I've seen recently
to providers who've said, I've got
10 people who can't start.
Mm. What are you doing? There's a really good breakdown of
what we're doing, who's where, what we are needing,
what we're waiting on from the student.
Right. And, and, and assuring them
that we're prioritizing it.
So yeah. I've, I've got high hopes right.
Um, that we'll just get better and better look
Forward to following up next year.
Yeah. Do we have any further questions on part three?
Very efficient, guys. All it.
Alright, well, we'll move on in that case, um, to part four.
Um, it sounds like Phil's got a bid.
Um, and so we'll move on to Phil just to,
for those, um, listening.
Uh, we are going to discuss changes to Visa settings,
new visas introduced in the last financial year.
Um, and of course you outlined Parent Boost
Visa, um, and other changes.
Phil, and then we'll go on to. Thank
You. Um, I'd like to
ask some questions about
The active investor plus Visa.
Um, there was much hoop are in the media about, uh,
$3 billion plus and so on.
Um, but I'd like to just dig down the sake of understanding,
um, actually how much has been invested
and what it's been invested in.
So if you could help us with that, that would be great.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Um, so my understanding is that, uh,
$1.05 billion have been invested so far.
Mm-hmm. Correct?
Correct. Correct. Yeah. Um, so I'm interested
To know, uh, the
Dollar figures and how that splits between the growth
and the balanced categories.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So the, the, if I've got the split,
the overall growth, I'm just looking at that.
Um, have you got that Sean?
Uh, so yeah, I've only got the figure here for the, um,
what's remaining to be invested, which is 1.5 in growth
and 640 million in balance.
Um, obviously we need, we, we will have the overall figure,
um, the, the, the general point is
that there's been a lot more, um, in growth.
Uh, I think it must be about two thirds overall.
Well, mm-hmm. Yeah.
We'll get the number, but it's around two.
There's, let's say on, on the growth category.
Okay. Um,
and then I'd be, I'd like to, uh, know the dollar figures
for within the growth category,
how much is direct investment
and how much is in managed fund. Yeah.
So, uh, as at the end of last year, there was, um,
so this is of the, the billion that been invested.
Yeah. Um, 538 in managed funds.
Uh, and I can further break that down in a minute.
Um, and, uh, 20 in direct investments
and then two 50 in bonds and then 53
and listed equities and 10 in property.
Sorry. Um, could you run
That? Yeah, sorry. 538
in managed funds? Yeah.
Uh, 20 in direct investments, 250 in bonds,
53 in liquid listed equities and 10 in property.
And within that managed fund category, uh,
the biggest is private credit with, uh, 49%, um,
discretionary investment managed services.
Um, or DIMS as they're sometimes called is 32%.
Um, and venture capital is at 10%. Okay.
Um, So, so I'll just make, make a couple points.
Um, one is that, um, well first of all, we're really pleased
that there has been a lot
of attraction in the growth category.
'cause these are the ones that do have, um,
more direct impact and, uh,
on growth businesses and, and economic growth.
Um, also the,
the funding is just part of what we're looking for here.
It's the skills and the networks
that the investors bring with them.
So the investments are good,
but then it's also what else they can do while they're here.
Yep. Um, and then, you know, the,
initially there was a greater proportion in private credit
that's been, um, coming down.
Um, and you've, you've seen some increase in these other
categories like venture capital as well, which we already,
What exactly does the private credit
Category mean? So it's,
it's, it's lending for, um,
businesses who are looking for growth. Um, capital
It's specifically for businesses or,
Uh, that would be Business development. Yeah.
Yeah. That would be, that would be right.
Um, right there, right, Stacy? Yes.
Okay. So the, the, um,
breakdown you just gave me is intended to add up to
that billion dollars invested in the,
in the growth category.
Is that right?
Yes. Although now that I look at it,
perhaps it doesn't quite add up to a billion.
So let me introduce Stacy Oow, who's our, um,
manager who's got, uh, the details on the
Sure. Thank you.
So on the categories that Nick provided, yeah.
So managed funds
and direct investments are under the growth category.
Yeah. So it's approximately 2% into, um,
directly into businesses.
Yeah. But the managed funds also deploy capital to
businesses to help them expand.
And then under the balance, that's the, the bonds,
the listed equities and the property.
So the splits about, um, in terms of applications, sorry,
Say that again. In terms
of applications, yeah.
80% into growth
and approximately 20% into balanced.
Okay. Cool.
Can, can you help us to be clear on the dollar figure,
uh, already invested, not applied for,
but already invested in the growth category?
Yeah. So can you give us the breakdown of
that growth category by dollar?
Yeah, we've got, um, the numbers change all the, the time.
So I'm gonna be using the numbers
as at the 26th of February.
Yep. So that's slightly higher than the 1.04.
Okay. Ish. So
101.18 billion has been
Growth Total.
Yep. So under the balance three one
318 million Yeah.
Into bonds. Yeah. So that's balanced. Yeah.
10 million into property. Yeah.
Which is balanced and about 65 into listed equities,
which is, um, balanced.
Okay. So then under the, the growth, yeah.
Um, we've got
about 780 million into
managed funds Yep.
And 20 million directly into businesses.
Okay. We,
we'll make sure we get you a better
breakdown. Yeah. Um, to the,
That still leaves 300 unaccounted for under,
Should be 800 million into growth,
and then the remainder is in balanced. Oh,
Okay. Sorry. So
perhaps what we can do is get
that breakdown from you as a follow up.
Yeah, that's, so that's that clarify.
So 800 million into, into growth,
and that's split 780 into managed funds in 20
into direct investment.
And am I right in thinking that the, the, the, um,
eligible managed funds is basically curated
around venture capital
and, uh, funds that invest in New Zealand businesses?
Correct. Yeah. So, so you have, um, private credit.
Yeah, that's one venture capital private
equity or fund of funds.
Right. Okay.
So, um, uh, have you done any, uh, any,
any modeling, uh,
or projections around what's likely to happen with that, uh,
those investments after people get their resident visa
In, in terms of will the money stay?
Yeah. Yeah. So, um, that comes down to what the agreement is
between those funds and the investor.
Right? So venture capital, private equity tend to have, um,
a 5, 7, 9 year commitment.
Sure. So that means, um, if
for visa investment period is three years,
they're still locked in beyond
That, but,
but how much do you know about that in terms
of the $800 million that's been committed under growth?
I mean, obviously the policy's not gonna be a success, uh,
and we've seen lots of evidence
of this in similar schemes overseas, people will, uh,
put it into a fund or an investment period.
They're required to as soon as they get their visa, uh,
job done and money goes elsewhere.
So I'm, I'm, I'm asking how much modeling
or analysis have you done about, uh,
and what you know about the current arrangements in place
or what happens to that money
after people get their resident visa?
So we don't, we don't know.
I mean, um, as you say, there's a, there's a every chance
that, that people will choose to, at the end
of the five year period, move their money elsewhere.
Um, what I would say in terms of success, uh, is, is
as I said earlier, part of that is what skills
and so on they're bringing to New Zealand.
And it could also be what investments they do outside
of these investments afterwards.
Mm-hmm. And so one thing we have put in place so
that we have more knowledge of that is a, is a survey,
a post survey that will be going out to the investors
so we can track that more easily.
We weren't able to track that under the old system.
So we're really mindful of being able
to track that under the system.
When at what point does that people get
that survey as the investors? Um,
They get it, um, two points in their immigration
investment process.
So two years after and up being granted their visa
and then at the end of the visa.
So we, um, should start
to get survey results from mid next year.
Right. Um, and we've also, um, developed a monitoring
and evaluation framework so we can find out
what the outcomes of the program are
beyond the investment period.
Right. So that will be looking at, um, what the,
what are the economic benefits to New Zealand, um,
what have people gone on to do
beyond their initial immigration investment?
And then how is New Zealand benefiting from their knowledge
and connections?
Right. How are you gonna do that?
Um, we are going to market to, um, procure, um, someone
to undertake that evaluation.
Right. And they'll go and talk to the, uh,
visa holders and Yeah.
Yeah. So managed funds, licensed advisors,
wealth mm-hmm. Managers
And the, um, visa holders.
Are they contractually required to, for instance, engage
with this process and complete the surveys and so on?
It is a condition on their, their visa. Right.
The, um, the two month check. Right.
So beyond the immigration period, yeah.
We can't, um, oblige them to,
but the experience that we have to date is
that people are very willing to, um, share their experience
and their contribution to date.
Right. Same with the wealth advisors
and the managed funds. Right.
So you can't, before You move on, sorry, Phil,
I think Sean's got some Oh, I was,
I was only gonna add that.
Yeah. Um, you know, alongside working hand in glove
with the immigration side of this is best NZ and,
and all the activity that they have underway, kind of this,
this aftercare, the, the, the, how do you continue
to build the connections, make the network so that you know,
the, the, the opportunity is maximized. Mm-hmm.
Um, so just on the question of the visa holders, um,
uh, the obligation to engage with the,
the study and survey and so on.
So once they, once they have the, uh, uh,
resident visa, there's no obligation,
there's no contractual obligation from that point.
Yeah. So this is getting a little bit technical,
but, um, they have conditions on their visa
and once they have, um, held their investment for three
years or five years
and maintained their time in three, yeah.
Those conditions are lifted. Right.
So beyond that, we can't, um, require them,
but through building relationships
and hopefully a great experience, they'll
provide information.
Okay. So, um, when would you expect to,
uh, have, uh, a kind of report or analysis, uh, on this?
What's the sort of sequence of, um,
doing the impact evaluations
and being able to draw some conclusions about investment
and the impacts of it?
So the first report from the, um,
monitoring the evaluation work is due mid next year.
Right. And then, um,
I think annually from them out until 2029,
I can confirm that.
Okay. We Have
a, a supplementary question from Grant.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, Madam Chair. Yeah.
I'm just, the minister made some changes
to whole active investor, um, uh, visa plus these and,
and how these outcomes compare with the, the previous regime
to what we're seeing now in terms of outcomes of,
So, um, under the old active investor plus settings,
in approximately two
and a half years, we had 116 applications
and a hundred million committed.
Mm-hmm. Um,
within 10 months we've had about 590
applicants and 1 billion committed.
So, um, higher volume in terms of people
and then money committed.
And part of that was, um,
a change in the settings under the old ones, the money had
to be committed over a staggered period.
We're under this new visa, they have six months
to commit the money, so New Zealand gets the, so
Thank You. All right. So
we have a new primary from Pam Sheet
and then Ricardo after that.
Thank you. Uh, my question is about the parent Boost Visa.
Uh, keen to know how many applications have been received.
And the second part, we know
that health insurance component was, uh, you know, something
that we discussed because, uh, my understanding at
that point was that not many health insurance, uh,
providers were willing to provide health insurance here.
So keen to know based on the applications you received,
how you verify that as well. So two parts in the,
So on the, on the numbers, it's um, uh,
724 applications received as of the February, uh,
and 235, uh, approved.
So in terms of the health insurance, that's probably a,
So yeah, I mean that, that is a feature of the policy.
One of the hard things around, um, really balancing, uh,
you know, the opportunity
and making sure that, that there is a, there is a,
a visa there that people can come, come through on,
but also managing it with, um, you know, potential costs,
uh, to the health system here.
Um, we did, in the formulation of the policy, we did a lot
of work together with insurance companies
to ask the question and understand
what would the nature of that be.
And you know, as you see with the figures that, um,
Nick talked about, um,
we've got people coming through that route.
Um, we are planning on, um, a review
of the settings in about a year's time,
and we'll be able to find out a bit more around, um,
you know, how people have found that.
Um, but certainly,
and we've seen, um, there, there are a range
of insurance providers in the market.
Some are more expensive than others.
It doesn't have to be a New Zealand insurer,
it could be an overseas insurer,
but there's a range of different options that people have.
So it's not like there's not a monopoly or anything.
So out of these 235, those who are approved, how many
of them have, uh, insurance policy
provided by a local provider versus
Overseas? I don't think we
have that breakdown of
who is in providing the insurance.
What we just check is that they do have a policy in place.
It covers the, um, the, the kind of standard requirements.
So we've been clear around what, what the minimum that needs
to cover, but I don't think we have a,
So you don't have the data at all.
Is there a reason why you haven't looked at that?
At who the insurance provider is? Yeah,
Whether it's overseas provider or local provider. Mm-hmm.
I think because the main check is to ensure that,
you know, the policy requirements are, are met, um, whether
or not we can delve in
and find that, like who the provider is,
I'm sure we would have that information,
but it's not something I would have hand
If you could provide that
information, that would be really good.
If you have any data. Sorry,
Can I just, the, the officials have said
that they can't provide that
Data, so it would be the expectation that that would, um,
how are you then validating?
Because every information that is
provided to immigration, you want to validate, right?
Excuse me. So if you, if you don't know where that in, uh,
insurance has been bought,
how do you go about validating that?
So is there like a list you like the, you know, you have
for medical checks, you have the list for overseas, uh,
people, and is there, like
what is the system put in place for that?
Oh, poll vs. Has joined us, which makes me think
that she knows the answer to,
We'll look at the information
that they provide from the insurance company to make sure
that it meets the minimum requirements for the policy,
but we do not administratively collect either the cost
of the insurance or, or who is providing it.
So that's not information that our system captures.
That's not information that we can share with you.
But an immigration officer, as part of their assessment
will be assessing does the policy meet the requirements.
So there is no mechanism that
for overseas insurance providers, there needs to be like,
there's a list approved by immigration,
there's nothing of that sort. So it could be any provider.
It's just that, you know, we've been clear around
what the insurance needs to cover. Yeah.
Yeah. And, and that's what did you get?
So one more question about, you said 724 applications
by 5th of February and approval of 235.
So I assume that there are still, uh, some being processed.
So this is not like the final,
That looks like there's been seven declines
so far for various reasons.
Um, but may mainly around health and the funds
and income requirements.
So there's a lot that are still being processed.
You know, as John said earlier, that this is the,
the balance between trying to, um,
facilitate entry while protecting the health system
and the fact that, you know, we, we estimated at the time
of the policy around two or two to 10,000 a year.
So we weren't really that sure about how many we would get,
but you know, that shows that we are definitely, um, on,
on track for that sort of a ballpark
and that it's not been, um, too, uh, in Super Bowl barrier
for people to, to get access
And, and just starting, sorry.
A lot will be approved in principle just
waiting for a document.
So they, they're in the system. Oh, yes.
And just waiting for something.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you.
I have another question, but that's the difference. Yep.
So, we'll, we've got a run of, uh, people, so we'll move on
to Ricardo and it is March for the next primary.
Thank you so much. One of the visa setting.
Oh, sorry, did you want to supplementary on parent base?
Okay. No. So we've got a supplementary then
from Phil, sorry Ricardo. That's okay.
I'm sorry. I didn't hear the, um,
the total number of approved so far.
724, oh sorry,
2 235. Yeah. Approved
235 over what time period? Over,
Uh, so it opened on 29 September last year.
Uh, and that was at five February. So what
That February 2 35.
4 4, 4 months. Yeah. Okay.
That's significantly less than you were
projecting all. Um,
No, I, I think that's, um,
and we didn't have a great basis for coming up
with the, the, that figure.
Yeah. Um, but you know that if you project that out,
that's a four month figure.
If you start to look at that over a, over a 12 month period,
I, I wouldn't be surprised if that gets up to
around the 2000 mark.
I mean, our overall estimate was between two, two
and 10,000 was our, we definitely on,
but that, that was a very, it was a guesstimate based on
looking at the, um, who were the queue around the mm-hmm.
Parent category. Okay.
And also the parent grandparent visa
and how much substitution we might get.
Right. Yeah. From I think
around 8,000 applications on the parent
grandparent visa per year. Yeah. Okay.
Um, do you have a, um, do you have numbers on the split
between people that are using the, uh, income threshold,
the sponsor's income threshold
or the applicant's, um, assets
or, uh, uh, applicant's income?
Yeah. We don't have that number to hand. Yeah.
But it, um, from what I remember,
and we can provide it to you properly, it's, um, the,
the bulk are from the sponsors income, right.
With a smaller group, um, from the funds
or income of the, of the parent.
Okay. Yeah. But we can provide that. Thank
You. That would good if you could.
And, um, what about country
of origin breakdown? Mm,
That's a good question.
I dunno again that we have that,
No, I don't have That.
No. Again, but we will have,
We can Follow up. Yeah, we
can. Okay. Thank
Right, uh, uh, supplementary from Carl.
Thanks chair. Thanks Nick.
I just wanna pick up on something you just said
about it being a guesstimate.
When it was presented, was it presented as a forecast
as your estimate or as a estimate?
So it, it was, was not a forecast. No.
Yeah, we were clear. Um,
and you, you know, in the cabinet page,
which is probably public, where there was a lot
of uncertainty around it.
So, you know, I, I'm being quite with
and using estimate, it was an estimate,
but it was an estimate, um, based on, um, those, uh,
reference points as far as we could.
But we were very clear there was a lot of uncertainty.
We also, Sorry.
Yeah. So we looked at, um, who was in the queue for the,
um, parent category, resident visa.
We looked at who is currently accessing the parent
grandparent visitor visa.
Um, and we also looked at the Canadian, um, figures for, um,
the proportion of people accessing a similar
visa that they have there.
So those were our sort of three key data points,
but we were very clear, it's a very wide range
and there was a considerable amount of uncertainty.
Okay. Because yeah, we don't hold the information to be able
to assess, um, how the people would be able
to meet those income and funds requirements in particular.
So I suppose I, what I was trying to get at, um,
or interested in is if there was a culture just referencing
earlier, some of the forecasting around numbers
when something's not hit, that it's, um,
exactly was really under, turned
into something like a guesstimate.
I see. What, what you're saying to
me is that's not the case.
No, no. This was well understood.
It was in guesstimate essentially from the beginning. Well,
Yeah, we, we, I mean, when on policy changes,
we'll do our best in relation to the information we've got
and we'll be clear with ministers about what's our level
of confidence Yeah.
With our forecasting. That is where, um, we need
to be striving to, you know,
use our best professional judgment, use the modeling,
and that is the area that Sean said earlier. We are,
And with all of these, you know, particularly these new,
um, visa categories that have been implemented, you know,
we have baked in a 12 month review, which is
as much about like learning what has the experience been
as much as talking to people who are using it
and understanding what their experience is.
That just kind of keeps us, yeah. And Allison,
You had something to add? Yeah,
just on nationality, um,
to give you the headline figures.
So of those so far, uh, 275 are from India,
194 from China, 59 South Africa, 48,
great Britain, 44, Fiji, 23, Philippines,
20 Sri Lanka 18, Vietnam, 17 United States of America.
And everyone, there's a number of, uh, below there
who are 10 or below and
It'll be, so there'll be applications.
Applications, yeah. So Phil,
you have a follow up to that then.
Have You done an analysis of, uh, the extent
to which those applicant communities will be
disproportionately, uh, constrained by
low incomes from applying?
No. Yeah.
I mean, it was a question obviously that came up
during policy development.
How do you, you know, it's, it's that balancing question
around, um, you know, this, this is a policy that kind
of bridges quite a range between the, you know, the resident
and the current visitor.
Um, one that we have.
How do you it is a longer term temporary visa. Sure.
Um, how do you just balance the part
providing that opportunity?
So something we looked at, but um, yeah, the
Ba the base requirement is the median wage.
So that's the, that's the lowest.
And that's actually the requirement in general
to access residents.
So it was policy consideration that those were
Is the staff, It's the, it's
From that list is people from the Pacific.
Yes. You had Fiji, but no other in that higher number.
But look at, look at the numbers. Yeah.
Okay. Well noted.
Um, so the next question is from Ricardo.
Oh, I'm just gonna try to make time.
So I make, just to preparing a little bit,
how many visas were granted in error over
the period we're reviewing
Over all categories?
Yeah. Visas issued in error. Yeah.
That would be quite a hard thing to quantify. That's
Okay. There's some upcoming changes,
obviously.
Well, the minister signal, there's some upcoming changes
that if you get granted a visa an error,
you will have basically not have it anymore.
So I wanna know whether this is a systemic problem
and whether through the current visa settings there's a
wide issue of visas being granted in error.
It would be a very hard thing to quantify. Okay.
Just moving on to the next thing then.
Um, have you seen an uptick on people who are
underage, disabled, perhaps within intellectual disability
or neurodivergent in this country since the changes
introduced in 2025?
Uh, what, what do you mean by uptake? Sorry?
Have you seen more children being unlawful in this
country, um, as a result of the strengthening
of the acceptable standards of health policy visa settings
that were changed in early 2025?
I'm not sure how I'd quantify that either,
but no, I haven't seen any information
that says there's been a massive up spike. Cool.
Are you seeing a growing
number sticking to the realm of children?
Mm-hmm. Are you seeing a greater number of people
who would have been born just after 2006,
after the birthright citizenship removal, turning 18
and trying to basically launch six and six months
or, um, uh, going through the IPT to try
and have the status regularized?
I haven't got that information.
I mean, we can look at the trend over time, um,
but we haven't sought to No,
I mean, I might to speak to one point
around those March, 2025 changes that you mentioned
around acceptable standard of health.
I mean that, um,
I think the minister would've spoken at the time,
the policy intent there was to look at, um,
aligning temporary and residence policy.
Um, and so that, that was the intent.
How, how that, you know, I think, like Allison said,
that doesn't necessarily kind of flow through to kind
of uptick is in, in numbers words.
It's just an alignment of policy. Right.
Okay. Uh, we have a primary question from, yeah, so this
Was, uh, my question is about the parent resident
category, um, the ballot system.
Mm-hmm. And I have received a huge amount of, you know,
concerns from people about the randomness
that the ballot system creates.
Mm-hmm. And people feel it's, uh, really unfair
because, uh, you know, some people, those
who just put their application
before the cutoff, um, are being drawn
and there are other people, those who are coming close
to the expiry and they have to pay the fee again
and go in the ballot system.
So I must say that I have written to the minister
to look into it, to change it to a queue system, um,
because then the time people have spent, um,
being there in the system would reflect, you know, like
how long, uh, when they put the application in.
So I just want to understand if there is something
being done in that space.
So it, it is on the minister's work program to bucket.
So we're in the process at the moment of advising her
and obviously, um, talk to her about that when she's here.
Great. So I it is on the work program.
Thank you so much. A completely different, uh,
then I've got a supplementary fellow.
You're right. That's been answered Wonderful.
New primary on the same in part four. No, uh, part.
Yes, same part. Part four. Perfect.
Go for it. It's in part four. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah.
So, um, this is about the, you know, the change
that was announced about, uh, visitors coming from China.
If they have Australian visa, then they can come
to New Zealand without requiring them
to have New Zealand visa.
Just interested to know how impactful that has been
and, uh, the take take, yeah.
Because obviously we want people coming in here Yeah.
And spend money. Yeah.
We've had a really high checkup, but Yeah. Yeah.
I've got the number. So as of the 20th of February,
we'd received 54,946, um,
N-Z-E-T-A requests from China, 1,486 from the Pacific.
And we've had 42,973 arrivals from China on those,
um, NZ ETA's and 730 from the Pacific.
And, um, the, the information we've had
so far when we have surveyed people is, is that they,
they have used this, they probably wouldn't have
come on vis to visa mm-hmm.
Any other way. So
Thank you Supple that
Yeah. By means.
Have you done any work on, um, the idea
of extending e the ETA access
to people from Pacific Island Forum countries?
That's already So they already have, yeah.
The Pacific Island Forum countries have the same
N-Z-E-T-A visa?
Uh, well, I, I'm not talking about coming
through Australia if they Oh,
right. I'm talking about direct
Okay. For Visa waiver.
Yeah.
Um, well, we, we are always working
with Pacific neighbors on, on
what their requirements are and what ours are.
We, we haven't got any policy work underway at the moment,
but we have got work we are doing, um,
to support the Pacific Island Forum around, uh, travel
around the Pacific.
So not just into New Zealand,
but for people to travel around the Pacific.
Um, we're doing that with all of the countries
and with our Australian colleagues.
And that does, I mean, obviously that's a,
a decision for ministers.
Mm. Um, it does get, um, as you know,
quite a tricky policy issue
because there's impacts on the vote would be,
there would be impacts on the Pacific countries as well
as obviously in New Zealand.
So it tricky. What, what would be
the impacts on Pacific countries?
Well, you could, you could end up with, um, um,
more workers, uh, coming to New Zealand and,
and having, um, you know, a, a large migration, um,
out of Pacific countries.
I think, um, this is a discussion just about, um,
visitor visas, ETA visitor Yeah.
Visa. So, so we have extended the amount
of time people can cut, get a visitor visa.
So now that they can have multiry for, um, two years,
we sort, we've been trying to, uh,
facilitate as much as we can.
Um, we've also, we hear from people
where they need to urgently travel.
And so we've set up a, a specific line, um,
for Pacific Travelers if they need to come here
for a funeral or wedding to, to progress, um, quickly.
We try, um, and have recently been out in the Pacific to try
and understand what the issues are for people there.
And so where we can facilitate, we absolutely try.
Thanks. Right. Uh, new primary from Ricardo
On part four, I'm Assuming.
Yeah. Um, it's in relationship
to the communication from the Trump administration
and relationship to the risk of migration, um,
that was sent in the period in the year we're reviewing.
Mm-hmm. Did you embark on any work
or were asked to embark on any work
to change data collection
or any visa settings as a result of the ask
by the Trump administration?
No. No. Not bloody have not. No.
No. Alright.
So what would you say, well, well, as a supplementary Yeah.
What would you say, uh, to the comments,
the administration in relationship
to our immigration settings
and do you think those reflect, um, actually the,
the policies and visa settings in place?
So what comment would that be?
Sorry. So, um, you may know
that actually we had a communication
by the Trump administration relationship
to our migration policies.
Yeah. This is in 2025. Yeah.
Um, and some of that included, um, uh, you know,
concerns around the data for immigration system.
Um, and so I'm, I was wondering whether, you know,
you had a response to that
or whether, um, any changes were brought as a result of,
I mean, there is sort of,
we are aware of that communication.
There has been discussions with American counterparts,
I think mainly to explain what our visa settings are
and how we, um, you know, the kind of risk management and,
and everything that lies behind.
Mm. Um, so I mean, that's just part of our, how
Is that received Very well without issue.
Yeah. Without issue.
And we haven't been asked for anything further. I
Mean, it is worth saying, we, we are, there are, um,
always areas that we are trying
to improve our risk management.
You know, some of the policy changes
around a WV were targeted to, to improve risk management
and some of the legislative changes in the
bill past last year.
So there has, there is, you know,
always work going on in some way
to improve risk management. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Go ahead. Thank you.
So we're gonna move on to part five, uh, which is, uh,
migrant exploitation.
Uh, have a question request from
Phil, and we will get going.
When you've had, uh, 210 exploitation investigations, uh,
70 trafficking cases, 120 infringement notices,
how can $372,000 in penalties possibly be,
uh, significant deterrent
or appropriate level of punishment?
Yeah. Given the scale of offending?
So Steve's joined us to go through the detail,
but remember we have a whole range of compliance tools
that we use right from the beginning when people apply
for accreditation, um, as an employer.
And the accredited employer work visa was designed
to make sure that we only accredit, um, employers
who will treat migrants well.
Um, so that's the start of the process.
Um, um, that there are a whole range
of things that we'll use along the way.
And Steve will talk about our integrated
compliance approach.
Yeah. Which might mean that involving the labor inspector
as well, it, it's not just
around using our powers and penalties, but others.
But Alison, can I just, I want Yeah.
I'm asking you as the secretary, is
that it's $372,000 in penalties in a year.
Given the scale of the problem, evidenced
by your own numbers, are
you satisfied that that's, it's not just
Adequate, it's not just penalties,
they've been prosecutions as well.
So Steve will give you the detail
and also, um, we've done some really good collaboration
offshore, um, with, uh, facilitators offshore including, um,
uh, prosecutions in other, other, um, other, uh, countries.
So Steve will run you
through the details in addition to the penalties.
That's not the only thing we do.
So in, in terms of, of your question around, um, uh, the,
is it, is it app the penalties appropriate?
The, the infringement regime is designed for those at,
at the middle range.
Um, we, uh, as, as Nick said in his opening,
we prosecuted 16 people during the period.
Um, and a, a number of those resulted in imprisonment,
and they certainly resulted in some quite high publicity
and removal from the immigration system
of those offending employers.
Um, and just in, in an interesting statistic, uh, in terms
of, of criminal prosecutions, um,
in 20 20, 20 24, we had
six cases before the court.
Currently, we've got 49 active cases before the court.
So we are really focusing, we,
there's a really strong focus on employers, um,
because they, you know, migrant exploitation is,
is we, we all agree.
It's, it's, it's a horrible practice.
Um, and there are all, there are victims
and people at the end of it,
but it also is, um, bad employers also create,
they, they undercut the, the labor market.
It's anti-competitive. It, it doesn't contribute
to economic growth, and it's just
simply not good for New Zealand. Mm-hmm.
So, um, uh, am I correct in hearing you say that the six,
there were 16 prosecutions in the period under review
In, in the period under review? Yes.
And you have 49 underway now. Yes. Yes.
So, Bit of recognition
that actually the efforts in the period under review were
insufficient, given the scale of, of offending,
It's 16 Seems incredibly low number
of prosecutions given the, the number of people
that the system is picking up. Yeah.
Criminal investigations are very complex,
uh, in the immigration space.
But we have focused more efforts on, uh, on the,
the higher offending of employers that, in, in terms
of the criminal space, the labor inspector, for example, um,
have done a number of civil, civil cases.
I can, I've got the numbers here for you. Um,
These are under
On top of labor inspector undertook, yes.
Undertook, I think 2000 investigations.
A number of them, um, you know, some of those dealt with
by early resolution.
Um, but to, to answer your question, yes,
we are focusing quite strongly on employer behavior.
It's a, it's a deliberate move to, to increase the number
of prosecutions and to, to take a much harder line, um,
on offending employers.
The infringements, the infringement scheme has been
incredibly helpful to us
because it, it allows us to, to hold people account
to account for behavior that is not at the serious criminal
end of offending, but it deserves some accountability.
And, and in addition, um, there is publicity associated
with the infringement offense, and they're also stood down
from employing migrants for period.
Okay. Um, I don't expect you to have it here,
but if you could, uh, please, um, uh, supply us
with, uh, a summary of the, uh, penalties
and, and sanctions that were achieved through prosecutions
so that we can see over
and above the infringement system, actually what kind
of sanctions were handed out. Yeah.
That, that's, that's very easy to
Do. So, sentences,
financial penalties, um,
that would be, that would be helpful.
It's, it's also worth knowing, um, the minister, uh,
announced that in the, in the upcoming immigration bills,
looking at funding the, um, maximum PC
for migrant exploitation, I did see, well, yeah.
Um, can I carry on? Uh, I have a, is it on the same?
Yeah, yeah, go for it. 'cause I was gonna say a
supplementary, but Okay.
So, um, what percentage
of the accredited employers have been audited in the,
in the period under review?
I'll have to get that number. Sorry.
And the follow up to that is
how many lost accreditation permanently
we had over, I know we had over
Thousand Ish. Yeah, I have
them. I have the numbers where there's been,
where there's been an action taken,
but I don't have the total number of, of activity.
I'll get it Going. What's the, yeah,
We'll, all of these things that you'd aren't
Able to give us now, we'll follow up with afterwards. But
What's the repeat offender rate?
So I can I have the stats here? Yeah.
So, um, as of as of the 27th of February this year,
802 employer accreditations are currently suspended.
1,259 have been revoked.
40 employer accreditations are currently under assessment
to consider revocation.
And 57 employer accreditations are under assessment
to consider suspension.
So we do take it very seriously.
Um, and we are, we are actively monitoring both those
employers who are accredited to see that they're complying
with the terms of their accreditation.
But equally, we are looking at those who are
outside the system and, uh, exploiting migrants.
Um, and so the 1,259 revoked, is that permanently revoked
or is that the six month suspension?
So that would be revoked.
That would be permanently revoked. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. So, um, um, so one of the, um,
aims is kind of behavior change across the community.
Um, how are you tracking that?
I mean, do you have metrics to try to determine whether all
of this activity is having some
lasting effect on the norms and the behavior?
Uh, with, by employees,
In terms of the, the accredited employer, they,
they would be on a monitoring schedule, so they'll be,
they'll be revisited again.
Um, if, you know, for, for not, not all of the, um,
employers who are, who who are found,
have done something wrong, are suspended.
Sometimes they're given an opportunity to improve
because it is about market participation and,
and as you say, behavior change.
And they will be revisited as part of the, um,
the ongoing monitoring process.
So I'm not talking about the individuals who will,
they'll work their way through your system.
I'm talking about the community as a whole.
You're trying to affect the, um, the norms
and the way people, employers operate in this space.
Mm-hmm. Do you have metrics to understand whether,
whether the effect of all your compliance
and enforcement is actually changing behavior in the system?
I don't think we have a holistic review yet.
I mean, the policy review was done on a WV,
which corrected some of the things
that were preventing employers from easily, um, complying.
Um, and it'll be something that we review ongoing. Mm-hmm.
I mean, just, just to be really clear, the vast majority
of employers are good employers in New Zealand, of course.
And none
of us have got an interest in tolerating behavior of bad employers.
Um, and so we use whole suite of tools that we've got,
but I think it is actually still a relatively new policy.
And we didn't accredit employers, um, before COVID.
Um, and so we can't even compare the behavior before to now,
but it's something that we're continually looking at
and to improve where we find things going wrong.
I mean, one of the things at the moment's,
a really big issue for us is around making sure
that New Zealanders are first in line for jobs.
So we are doing some work with MSD, um, so to make it easier
for employers, we've tried to, um, facilitate kind
of self declaration to get, um, get, um, applications
through quickly, but then we're back checking with MSD
that they were engaged with,
that they didn't have people that could do those jobs.
So there's a whole range
of compliance activities we are doing
to try and shift behavior.
So other than the, um, the changes to the penalties
for selling jobs, what are you doing
to stop people selling jobs? So we,
We have a, um, in terms of, there's, there's a lot
of education and,
and our offshore, um, risk teams, uh, working very closely
with, with the offshore markets to, to educate, uh,
potential visitors and, and,
and migrants to New Zealand to understand, uh, you know,
what, how, what the correct way to come to New Zealand is
and what the correct pathway and how to, how to, how to, um,
apply for a visa without sort of have going, having to go
through a bad agent offshore.
Um, and we, um, we, we receive a, a lot
of information, uh, through our, our, uh,
national prioritization process.
And, and we evaluate that information.
So that will tell us a story about how,
how many people are complaining about having to pay
for jobs, and we'll investigate
where there's sufficient evidence.
Mm-hmm. So, um, we, we, we hear through the media
of, you know, particular cases of where jobs are being sold,
but anecdotally within the industry, within the sector,
there's a very strong suggestion that it's much, much more,
uh, extensive than we hear publicly.
And you can understand that there's a powerful incentive
both for the, the Apple Visa applicant
and for the employer to collude and,
and borrowing tens of thousands of dollars to get a visa
and, uh, and then under the, under the, under the table.
Yeah. It's hard and effectively then have to pay,
pay it back in a form of bondage when they get here.
My question is what are we doing to break that?
Uh, what is a really toxic incentive
that is built into the system? I mean,
I, oh, I was just gonna add on the po I mean,
on the policy side, I think it's about having a whole range
of different tools.
Um, and so if I take a EWV as an example, you know, some
of the changes that, um, were made were
to aimed at reducing vulnerability.
So the change to English language, um, the return to,
to needing the skills, um,
and experience as well through to the introduction
of the migraine exploitation visa.
Um, uh,
and so, you know, it, it's kind of, I hear your point, it's,
it's sort of, there's no, I don't think one big bang
thing that's gonna solve it.
It's kind of taking, um, a whole range of different steps,
whether that's changes to legislation where, you know,
it's now, um, criminal to, to be charging a premium.
Um, two. Yeah.
One of the things we've been trying in the period,
particularly joining up with M five partners, is offshore,
um, marketing, uh, on different social media platforms, um,
that s would use.
Um, I know it's a shock to my team,
but everyone reads our website.
So we've been doing lots of work in market, um,
and I have verification teams who are helping us
with Intel on that.
We act on every piece of intelligence that we get,
but as you say, there is always,
there are always bad actors in the system trying to exploit.
And it's, it's, it's not something, um,
that one silver bullet will fix.
But we're trying everywhere we can for quite a bit, bit
of success with the social media campaign,
with people coming forward.
And I think the fact that all five of us are doing it,
'cause you probably have seen in the past where,
where the UK have tightened up, all
of a sudden they hit New Zealand.
We're trying to move as a, as a five mm. Um, in that.
But any other suggestions gratefully received?
'cause we're trying absolutely everywhere we can.
And one thing I just need to make clear, when I said
that Rev revocation, people can't employ migrants,
they can apply later for re-accredited tech
for accreditation from scratch,
but they would have to prove that they had, um,
they meet the policy and that their behavior is amended,
and it would be a pretty high bar for us.
Yeah. So
I have a, a supple Metric question from
Grant and then Carl.
Yeah. Um, thank you. Just going back to the prosecutions,
you said, was it 16 last year?
16 in the period under the review Yeah.
And 49 and the courts coming forward.
Yes. Correct. So how does that compare with recent,
with recent years that,
because it seems to be a big jump, is how does that compare
with previous years of prosecutions?
Uh, so it, as I said it, uh, three years ago,
we had six current six prosecutions before the court six.
And, and, and it's a deliberate focus on, um, uh,
Look, We, we, what we've done is we've, we,
we have regular file reviews now
with the supervisors looking at the, the, the cases.
Yeah. And, and making a determination if, um,
if the case has, has reached a certain evidential threshold
where we can prosecute and hold someone to account mm-hmm.
Um, we will prosecute at that point rather than kind
of keep going for the bigger case if
it's not actually possible.
Yeah. Um, and it, it's a, it's better case management
and it's, it's better oversight by supervisors.
And so what's brought about that change, you think? Um,
Just, uh, we had a, we had a look at what the, the,
the profile of the market was and,
and what, what some of the harms were that we were seeing.
And it was a deliberate response to that.
Why wasn't that happening earlier?
Um, I can't say I, um, wasn't in the Yeah,
It's ancient history Grant Shun
Have something To say on that.
It's, Sorry,
but No, I was just drawing my attention to, um, the kind
of range and suite of work that we have underway
or in place for ongoing monitoring.
Mm-hmm. And one of the things that is in development at the
moment, I, I don't like the name
of it is called the Temporary Migrant Exploitation
Dashboard, but what it is, it's, it's,
it is a tool for monitoring.
Mm-hmm. That, and so, you know, like in a year's time,
we might be back here talking more around what we see in
that, but, so we're just thinking about
how do we bring all those pieces together.
And can I just follow up on that?
And I know we're sort of exhausting this point,
but I think Phil sort of tried to get into this point.
You've had 16, now you're at 49,
but what's, you know, based on the fact
that you've got an overall number of people that are being,
you know, facing various different penalties.
So some of it might be, you know,
before the courts resulting in imprisonment
or whatever that sentence might be, some end up with,
you know, financial penalties, some, you know,
I'd like to see you improve.
Are you seeing the, the overall number of
non-compliant employers about the same,
but you are taking a harsher approach,
therefore there's 49 as opposed to 16?
Or is it that actually overall you are uncovering
by your work more people
and so it scaled relatively? Yeah, I mean, we
Are, we are learning, we didn't have anything Yeah.
Before a WV that gave us the information.
Now we've now got a really rich source of information,
which, and it's a bank of information
that's growing year on year.
Great. So I, I, I think that would be
what you'd expect to see.
Yeah. And a compliance operation
that's getting more information. Yep.
Fantastic. Um, Carl had a, a supplementary
to this too, so thanks.
Thanks, chair. I wanna go back, Allison,
to something you touched on before.
Obviously the government is very keen
to see New Zealanders not in work, getting into work.
Um, so can you just expand on
how Immigration New Zealand ensures that New Zealanders
are being prioritized for jobs
and that migrants are only employed where there's, um,
genuinely no suitable New Zealanders
available to do the job?
So we do a market test with every single job,
and that's what a WV is designed to do.
And we have, as we've learned more, we've tightened up, uh,
we work really closely with MSD.
So for us, um, the MSD are the experts on
what the market is like in any, in any area.
Any area. So in a WV is
for a specific role in a specific part of New Zealand,
and we expect employers to work with Ms.
D to fill that post if they can from people
who are unemployed, um, in the area.
Um, as I said,
the accreditation has taken quite a long time, so
to speed the process up, we allow employers
to give a self declaration,
but we go back and we check on that.
So, um, for the MSD referrals that we've had, uh,
95 revocation referrals came from MSD, where we said
to them, people tell us they've worked with us,
and they say, uh, we don't believe
that they have have mm-hmm.
Um, 24 were then revoked, 68 were not revoked.
And that was mainly because the employers hadn't been
trying, it was kind of, they, it was an education piece.
They didn't know quite how or who to engage with
or had gone, gone about it the wrong way.
But between us, um, the system is allowing us to tighten up
and to make sure that employers know.
And quite often employers don't know
that there's somebody in their area.
Um, and if you go back further, there was a, um,
a more cumbersome process.
And so as part of the, um, A WV really tried to make
that more streamlined and the, the accreditation
for the employer is a real, is a real stick that, um,
that we have and working closely with SD is, is,
is paying. Mm-hmm.
Do you think we're doing enough to make sure
that we are filling jobs, that there are New Zealanders
who could do the job, um, being put into that work
before we allow for a migrant
to come into New Zealand to fill the job?
I, I think it's a, it's a balance.
It's, um, you could, you could make it much tougher
to get a migrant, and that would force employers
to look harder, that would, um, make it harder for visitors
to get the labor they need.
So I think like most things in the
immigration system, it's a balance.
Um, and the ministers have, have chosen that balance
of tools that they think does put the onus on,
and we've tried to make that as streamlined
as possible while also, you know, being facilitative
with businesses are, are genuinely working to try
and bring in people where they can.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, new primary. Thank you.
And then, um, we've also got, just acknowledging
with the time we've got left, um, part six and part seven.
So, um, we're still on part five.
Agreed. Thank you very much.
Um, is migrant exploitation tracking upwards or downwards?
And what metrics are you using to ascertain this? Mm-hmm.
I mean, I, I'll say this is, this is the,
the hard question to answer, right?
But I think there are some reasons to think
that we are moving in the right direction.
The sort of things that I would point
to are those a WB changes
and how we have seen the change in the skill mix.
Um, that's, uh, um, certainly, uh, one signal, um,
the number of migrant exploitation, um, visas as well. Oh,
Sorry, I've, I've got the number of my total migrant
exploitation complaints, if
That's helpful. Yes.
So, uh, for financial year 23, 24, 3 9, 2 5,
uh, of 24 25 2 7 0 1,
and the current year tracking at 1 2, 2 9.
So, so there, there are we,
So you've seen the number of complaints
as a measure, is that what you're saying?
To track whether migrant exploitation is
trend out upward or downwards? This
Is, this is just a, just a number that the,
I I think it's quite a complex piece
because we can only see what we can see.
Yeah. So, um, the, we all worry, I think about people
who come to this country and don't, and are exploited.
We've done an awful lot of work, um,
in transnational crime around trafficking.
And Fiona might be able to talk about that.
The work that we are are doing to make sure, um,
we have protections, we have, um,
liaison officers offshore in post where people come through.
So there's a whole range of offenses
that we don't want in New Zealand,
and I don't think there's any
one measure that can get there.
I worry about the people who've overstayed their visa
and not because I want them out,
but I worry about how they're making money
and who's exploiting them or could be exploiting them.
So there's a whole range
of measures I think that we would need
Just to follow up on that comment.
Yeah. Uh, would it be correct to make claims
that over their numbers have increased by tens of thousands
of people recently?
I dunno where you would come to that conclusion,
That's not correct. Right.
Well, from the figures that we know, we don't believe
that there's been a massive change in the numbers.
Cool. And just, um,
you mentioned earlier the migrant
exploitation protection visa.
Um, would you say that's a useful indicator
to assess whether migrant exploitation itself is going up
or down, or do the number just simply reflect the change in
the visa settings that have made it harder for people?
Well, it's just, well, it's just one indicator.
Although the exploitation visa has changed,
we've also loosened arrangements around, um,
these people being able to change jobs, um, more easily.
So if somebody's being exploited, it's easier
to change your role, um, than it was in the past.
So there are a whole load of things moving at the same time,
which would make it hard to come to that conclusion.
How, how many of the migrant exploitation protection visa
holders, what percentage of them have been able
to transition to a new accredited employer work visa
or another work visa for that? I
Don't have that figure. Think
You've got that. Have
you seen reports that it is,
that the six month duration of the visa has made it hard
for people to transition onto an
accredited employer work visa?
Or have you not been made aware
that there's ongoing challenges due to the,
I I do believe there are ongoing challenges
for anyone who's been exploited
and then going on to find another job.
And the job market has changed quite considerably
as well since the visa was introduced.
So there are a whole range of factors.
Do you think the length of the duration
of the visa has contributed to those challenges?
I think, I mean that the, the length
of the visa was also like, again, a trade off between,
you don't want someone languishing on a particular visa.
You actually do want them moving on to, um, whatever's next.
And it does look like there are, um, I think this is, we,
we, we can get you this number properly,
but it looks like there's a significant number of people
who have managed to move onto a different visa, um,
from the market exploitation visa.
So let, let's get you that number. Mm-hmm.
And if it's, um, it would be good
to know whether it's a work visa and what kind.
Yeah. Supposed to just have visa.
We, we'll get the breakdown for you.
Thank you. Lots to follow Up on.
And actually, I also just mentioned the point also made that
this is not always well understood
that there is this process through the A WV
around the variations of condition.
And we do, uh, really, um, have the number
of people who've used that so that if you're in an employer
that you wanna move to a different accredit employer,
you can do that variations of condition
and there are a number to use
There. Thank
You. Right. A supplementary
from Carl,
and then we'll move on to part six.
Thanks very much, chair.
Just on this point, do you think it's well understood that,
uh, temporary work visa
or a migrant work visa is essentially that an opportunity
to come to New Zealand to work for a short period of time?
Mm-hmm. And then to go home?
I, I'd like to think so,
but I, I'm really aware of all the people
who advertise a future in New Zealand, um,
off any other visa over sell.
You know, we've stopped people at the border who've been
given a, who who've got a transit visa
and been told that they're gonna
get residents in New Zealand.
So we do everything we can to make sure people are aware of
that, but yeah. Yeah.
Um, thank you. And yeah, definitely an issue.
Uh, part six, uh, we are moving on to refugees
and asylum seekers and we have a bid from, so
Just before We move on, there is a number, ah, so, uh,
997 people have moved from the exploitation visa onto a
EWV, which was your question
In the last three years. In
the last three years, It's
a proportion of what total?
Um, I think it's about 4,300
Quarter. I just keep
doing this because my metric from my team is
to have no more than three follow ups
and I realize I'm really failing.
So about a quarter of people have
Managed to move on.
Just noting though, that there are a number of things
that you are following up on as we go.
So surely we are down to three. Yeah. Um, right.
Uh, so Phil, first question for part six over to you.
Yeah. Um, refugee family support category.
Last time you were here, we discussed the, you know,
effectively kind of a notional eight
to 10 year waiting period for anyone who's, uh, would
otherwise be eligible for tier two.
Yeah. Um, if it was open. Yeah.
Uh, and there was some progress I think being made on
getting through tier one.
Can you give us a snapshot, Fiona, of where,
where we're at with both those now? And
We've got Fiona Whiteford chair,
who's the head of our, um, refugee.
Yep. Yeah, so, so the good news on that front is
that we are now processing, uh, tier two registrations.
So if I look at where we were a year ago,
we had 4,190 people, um, awaiting processing.
We're now down to 3,693.
So we think that what happened is, particularly post COVID,
um, there was a significant increase in the number
of tier one registrations.
Um, we've seen to have got through most of that bump.
So we've got tier one registrations coming in, um,
but not nearly at the rate that we had in the past.
So we are now actually getting into that tier two category.
I'm really reluctant to give any kind of time frame
around that.
Um, simply because what we are finding is we start to go
through those registrations
and, um, issue invitations to apply
quite a few people either
for their circumstances have changed significantly,
maybe they've actually sponsored people
through another mechanism, so they maybe, um,
they've moved offshore.
So we're actually finding quite a big drop off rate from the
people from the, when we issue invitations from the
registrations to invitations to apply.
Yeah. So we're actually going
through them faster than we expected,
but until we get a real sense of what
that conversion rate we're calling it is.
I'm, I'm, I'm reticent to try
and put any kind of timeframe figure on it,
but we are really working into
that tier two category. Okay.
So can, can you gimme those numbers again?
So, um, 3, 6, 9 3 is what's currently in the pool.
That was at the 20th of February.
It'll be less than that now. Okay.
It was last year, 4,000 From 190. That's the tier two.
Yeah. Tier two. So, um, have you given any thought
to reopening tier two for new, uh,
Applications? So we
haven't given thought to reopening tier two, um,
but, um, RFSC is on the minister's policy work program.
Mm-hmm. So, um, there's a piece of policy work
that is scheduled to commence soonish.
I mean, I think with the number that are currently
sitting there right.
Reopening and getting a whole bunch of new registrations,
understanding that people do wanna be in
that space is a, you know. Yeah.
Um, so the, the, it's on the work program,
but how is that framed?
Is there a problem to be solved
or what is the intent having on the work program?
You know, in talking to the minister about it,
she's very conscious of how many people are sitting in
that space and how many people have sat in
that space for quite a while.
Mm-hmm. Um, the policy conundrum, if you like, is
how do you, it's it's the managing, um, you know,
with the numbers and how many you can bring through.
So I think she's interested, um, you know, we need
to do a bit more scoping for her,
but just under understanding h
how do you manage the demand. Mm-hmm.
And the policy is, I mean,
the original policy is old, right?
We've done some work in the last year. Yeah.
And I mean, it's over 20 years old going back over some
of the original policy settings.
So it's, uh, really time for a, a good refresh
to think about actually how should this category work
Effectively.
Right. Okay. Have More,
No. Well, yeah.
No one else been Anything to report on
You A supplementary, sorry.
I'm happy for him to go, like, I'm happy for him to wait
to do his line of session. Uh,
No, it's a new primary by the, by my understanding.
So if you take this supplementary
and move on to Phil's new primary.
Thank you. Um, how many concerns
or, um, people do you have that are a risk of aging out due
to the weight that they're facing
and the family reunification
Category aging out? Well, that,
that is the risk that is, and I think,
and it's a, it's a little bit unknown at the moment in terms
of being able to put a number of
how many people might be in there
because, um, the processing of,
of that group of people who are,
How would you be dealing with, uh, applications
where the applicant may have aged out due to the wait times
that are not really through fault of their own.
I mean, we are required to apply
to immigration instructions as they were at the time
of registration.
So that's, that's the world
that we are in. Okay. New primary,
Phil. Yep. Um,
are you doing any work on, uh, the likelihood
of the current war in the Middle East creating large
movements of people that will create the demand for, uh,
resettlement opportunities in New Zealand?
We haven't been asked for specific advice.
I mean, we are one of a number of agencies, obviously
who are monitoring the situation.
I think Allison talked a little bit earlier
around the operational response.
Um, but we are certainly, you know, we are not, we,
we are attuned to that, but we haven't been asked for
Advice. Okay. I mean, the
one thing I would say is
that we are aware, there's currently 41 people
that we are looking to bring to New Zealand as part
of the refugee quota program whose travel has been impacted.
So for example, they were due to arrive next week.
So we're working really closely with IOM around
how we reboot that travel, making sure where people are,
they looked after and so on.
So there's some small operational impacts on our delivery,
but we don't think that will impact
Quota. Are these quota
refugees the process to come? Yeah. Okay.
So a few subs on from, uh, related.
So given, um, that the large scale refugee crisis,
uh, subcategory was removed from the, uh, quota mm-hmm.
Um, my question is whether, um, got a question, uh,
you have utilized the new ad hoc emergency intakes, uh,
basis, which allows the associate minister
to request specific intakes people, um,
around crises like Sudan currently,
or the kind of thing we may well see in the
Middle East in coming weeks?
No, no. We haven't used that provision,
No. Okay.
Um, on the question of, uh, Palestinians, uh,
who have been, uh, wanting to, um, uh, come to New Zealand,
most of whom have got family here, um, uh, there have been,
uh, I think at least 41 asylum applications in the past, uh,
uh, 30 months from Palestinians with 41 approved, uh,
during the same period.
I want, uh, my question is whether it makes sense for,
to effectively push those Palestinians into an already
overburdened asylum process, uh, when, uh,
I would've thought there, there is the potential
to process their visas through the normal way.
What, why has that been done?
Sorry. I mean,
those people will have arrived on different visas.
Yeah. And the current settings are that should they choose
to apply for asylum once they get here,
we will process them.
We put them in our, um, some of our fast track processing
because we know with the high approval rates of
that overlooked that they are, uh,
we don't want them sitting in the queue so we can find,
process them as quickly as possible.
Right. But the fact that they're going into,
they're going into a very, a difficult
and um, uh, costly asylum process,
they're being pushed into that
because there's no ready pathway.
And that's just, we, I mean, you're right there,
there isn't a specific policy for, um,
for, for Palestinians.
Yeah. Um, so on another matter, um, the, uh,
policy, the current policy of 600, uh, people each year
under the refugee family support category.
Mm-hmm. Can you clarify for me is that, um, 600
visas, 600 people arrive?
'cause in the last three years there's been 406 481
and 548 actually arrived.
So that, that's approvals. So it's approvals.
And then we facilitate their travel afterwards
and they have a 12 month window within which to travel.
Um, there will be, on the odd occasion, people who choose
not to travel, um,
or their, their travel gets deferred for some reason.
But the policy is 600 approvals.
Wouldn't it be, given that there's obviously, um, uh,
given it's not easy turning those approvals into arrivals,
wouldn't it be better to have a policy of 600 arrivals
with a tolerance of, you know, 5% either side?
'cause we're, because the, we, it's,
we're significantly under.
Right?
I guess there's a range of reasons why people arrive
or don't arrive, but I mean, the policy will be considered
as part of the policy review.
So that would I'm sure be part
of the general thinking and session. Yeah.
And I guess there is that balance right?
Between the focus on approvals means that these people
are approved to come
and then it's kind of working within their circumstances,
which may be wide ranging about when are they able
to actually physically arrive.
Yeah. So
If you said to most New Zealanders, it's our policy
to provide 600 places a year, people would expect
that means 600 people will come.
Yeah. But it's substantially less. Mm-hmm. So, yeah.
Um, Sorry, do you have a new primary or is that a,
Uh, it's more in the general area.
So if I could get, uh,
Ricardo's supplementary and then we can move on to
General. Just on the
question. Phil asked about, um,
whether you were doing any work to explore the potential,
um, increase in Islamic
and refugees due to the war saying, as you said, that
so far there hasn't been any requests.
How are you looking at applying, for example,
bonafide visitor, um, requirements from people
who are coming from countries
that are currently affected by the war?
And will you be loosening some of those criteria,
or are you still looking to apply it as they are?
We have to apply, yeah.
As, as the instructions currently are. Mm-hmm.
Do you see that that could pose a bit of a challenge
for some people who may be facing uncertainty
and, um, may not be able
to meet those requirements?
At this point in time,
Yes. But we don't
have a choice
but to use the instructions we have.
So this is related to that. Yep.
Um, uh, so Immigration New Zealand applies a, uh, kind
of a risk assessment for people applying for temporary visa.
Mm-hmm. And so people who are coming from, uh,
developing countries from countries affected by war
and stability tend to have a higher threshold in terms
of the documentation they're required to provide,
to assure people
that they will go back at the end of their visa.
So that's understood.
Um, but I have to say my own personal experience in
advocating for constituents has been that it's often, um,
an extremely blunt, uh, process that is, um, delivered by,
um, your offices at, at, at, at office level.
And, um, people have often got, have had to go through kind
of repeated declines at significant personal expense cost.
Um, and it's sometimes, uh, it's only advocacy
that gets a fresh look, uh, at it.
And I just wonder whether that's a problem that you are kind
of, are, are aware of
and whether you think see it as a problem.
'cause I see it doing a lot of damage
to the community's confidence
in the integrity of the system.
I mean, I, I'm confident in the training of our offices,
um, and they application of the instructions as they are
with the information they have in front of them,
there will always be they're humans, right?
So there will always be, and every case is different
and they have to weigh and balance.
It's such a difficult job.
Um, but they do it with great, um, integrity.
And also in, um, I've seen cases
where people have really worked hard to make sure that they,
the facilitation, um, or the benefits to New Zealand
or to families within New Zealand are taken into account.
And so it's always a really difficult decision.
And I, I know MPS in particular,
you will hear about the cases
where people felt we didn't get that right.
Um, as opposed to the, you know,
over a million decisions we make
and the vast majority end with satisfied customers.
It's just such a difficult job.
And I, I I, I every day, um,
I totally admire the work that my people do.
It's hard work. And when we don't get it right
or we get additional information, we try to put it right
as quickly as we can.
But, but I, I've sat next to officers with some of these
and they are really difficult decisions to make.
And, and on the other side,
and this is, these are in place to try and check the system
and, and have, keep confidence in the immigration system
for New Zealanders that we are leading people in who are,
um, you know, here for the reasons that they say they're,
so, it acknowledges
It's a difficult, but the people who are applying,
for example, to have a family member come to New Zealand,
they're New Zealanders too.
They are, yeah. And they deserve to be, uh,
they deserve a system that treats them with respect
and with integrity
and systems that actually are fair
and justifiable and consistent.
Yeah. I absolutely, but there are many, ca I, I'm,
I personally have experienced many cases
where it's unfathomable to me that decisions have been made.
And I think that it's, uh, it's a very blunt approach Yeah.
To, for develop people from developing countries
and countries affected by war
and instability get basically a blanket
note and in many cases.
So I just wanted to, yeah.
I, I, I mean it is pass that it isn't a blanket now,
and we have given travel to people from, um, those cases,
but I, I recognize it's really hard to prove, um,
that you are going to leave the country again.
I mean, that's the biggest, I think where,
where people are kind of bonafide, where
we don't feel there's sufficient
evidence that they will go back.
Um, and there doesn't seem to be sufficient reason
for them pool for them to go back
and there's a greater pool to stay.
And as Nick says, it's to kind of protect what we need
to keep for New Zealand as well in terms of health
and education and jobs.
It's, it's just, and,
and some of these cases are heartbreaking.
Uh, and I, I sometimes worry for my officers
because they have to work within instructions
and they deal with really heartbreaking cases.
Mm-hmm. I would say as well.
And it is a very small minority,
but there are cases even with New Zealand families
who don't understand the full picture of their relatives.
And that's a very difficult place as well
for us keeping information confidential.
I I've seen a couple of cases
where it's really heartbreaking, um,
because we, we can't explain to people
and neither should we give personal
information about the applicant.
Okay. Add more.
Cool. Um, okay.
Can I just check that we are now moving on
to general part seven or are we still on seven? I happy to
Move. I'm on six.
You've got more on six
and you're happy to move to seven so far.
I mean, well, I mean, look on part seven is general. Yeah.
It's all general fine.
Um, uh, Phil, I'll just go to you
and then we'll go to you Ricardo, and then we'll thank you.
That lands. Yep. Um, so I just wanted
to ask you about the, um, the policy settings around,
uh, the treatment of asylum seekers.
Um, but first just to ask, well, what is the current state
of play with the, uh, pipeline of asylum claims
and processing times?
Yeah, so in terms of the pipeline, um,
our decision making has, um, increased significantly
and we are well on track to, um,
make 1600 decisions this year, um, which is
what we are aiming for.
Um, uh, we are probably looking roughly,
um, at about 2000 claims this year though.
So we, um, still are not quite at, um, in flow
for the number of decisions coming in, uh, number
of claims coming in, but we are getting much closer.
Yep. Um, so we are doing a whole lot of things to try and,
and build that, um, uh, you know,
become more efficient in this space.
Um, how you, how are the number of claims
tracking the volume of claims?
Uh, in total? Yeah. Yeah.
So in total, we currently have,
or as it, the 4,002 undecided claims on hand.
Yeah. And, um, claims lodged per year.
So we are tracking to about 2000 claims. Again this year.
It's looking slightly lower.
So in 23, 24 we had 2,345
and 24 25 we had 2,270.
And as at 31 January this year we had 1,167,
but it's only seven months of the year.
So we, we are estimating that will be, um,
it is slightly tricking down the number of claims,
but it's certainly not a, a big scale, but
There's a jump up from about three years ago.
Right. We had, we
Had a big jump post COVID jump
And, and average length of time for a claim
to be allocated to a refugee protection officer.
Now I do have that somewhere.
Um, sorry.
So, oh,
the average age I've undecided claim on hand was 436 days.
4 36 days. Yeah.
So, um, given that it's that long, wouldn't it be sensible
to, um, give asylum seekers a work visa for that period
and suddenly our asylum claimers decided
so they can support themselves, contribute to the community
and be less of a burden.
So, so they do get work visas, um,
and the approval rate, um, is 98.3%, uh,
for 24 25, and currently it's 98.9% for this year.
So, so just about every person gets a work visa, um,
while they're on asylum claim.
Typically people won't get work visas if it's a subsequent
claim or it's a claim that's being found
to be manifestly unfound by the IPT or something like that.
But so very much, pretty much most people get work visas.
So before their case is allocated
to a refugee protection officer.
Yes. So as soon as you lodge your confirmation
of claim at the same time you lodge your work visa
application and then,
and then as I say, this year, the approval rate is 98.9%.
So, so absolutely the intention is
that people support themselves Okay.
Throughout the course of the claim
and they're able to do so.
Okay. Um, and that's an open rights work visa too.
So, um, uh, when, uh, a
quote a refugee comes to New Zealand Yes.
The, uh, permanent residence has been processed off,
off while they're offshore.
Correct. And when they arrive, they have,
they have permanent residence.
Um, um, why is the, the why are, um,
convention refugees or asylum seekers treated so differently
and they end up having to wait several years
before they get permanent residents?
So I think the key difference is that for a quota refugee,
we do the health screening, security screening,
all those things offshore
before we, um, approve the permanent resident,
um, for that person.
So when they come to New Zealand, they've been
through all the, uh, residents, uh, processes that they need
to go through for an asylum secret.
Most typically they've arrived on a
visitor visa or something like that.
So they haven't been through any health screening,
they haven't had any security screening
or any of those other typical screens that we would do. And
Our quota refugees are referred from U-U-N-H-C-R.
So that has been established. That's quite a,
Just to explain all the difference.
I mean, people have been through an exhaustive process
of having their, their asylum claim
investigated and processed.
Why not give them permanent residence as soon as they, uh,
their claim is recognized
Because we haven't done the health screening
or the security screening at that at that time. So, and,
And, and we only approve, you know, 20,
25%, 25% at there are a lot of these claims that are,
that turn out not to be, um, meeting the threshold
For refugee states.
Yeah. But I'm suggesting that, um, if you, the principle
of a quality of treat of treatment between convention
and quota refugees, which is central
to the resettlement strategy, is not really
reflected in the, in the,
the difference in the way they're treated.
So, um, uh, it takes, um, applications
for PR visas
for former asylum seekers are taking roughly one to three
and a half years now checking people's health status.
It doesn't, it doesn't take that long to do that.
I guess it's, it's not just health.
There is a range of checks that need to be gone through
and, um, you know,
and people are obviously also lawfully here in New Zealand
and can work and do all those
other things while they're here.
Mm-hmm. But that is, that is the process.
It's just literally a difference
of what's done offshore versus what's done onshore.
Does that explain one to three and a half years,
It seems like, but, and it's establishing their claim
to, to that status.
I mean that's, that, that's the process. That's yeah.
That, that takes the time. Right.
Um, I mean that, that,
that part which does take an ordinate amount
of time I agree, is usually done
for quota refugees by U-N-H-C-R.
Yeah. So by the time we've got them the kind
of really lengthy process
of establishing whether they're
genuinely refugee has been done.
Mm-hmm. Whereas we have to do that once they're on shore,
we know nothing about them. Mm-hmm.
So, so it, it is, um,
it typically takes one to three and a half.
Um, it, it is one to three years
for the asylum process on top of that.
It's another one to three
and a half years to get a permanent residence visa.
I just cannot see how that can be justified by the need
to do the sort of checks you're talking about.
I mean, it's, it's just, so that's,
That could be six or seven years
And, and, and that's exacerbated by the number of people
who are in the queue that we're trying to get down.
So we can, we are doing, Fiona
and the team are doing an incredible job at trying to cope
with what is a worldwide phenomenon of people claiming
so many people displaced and trying to claim as Salem
or asylum around the world.
And we are getting faster.
It's, it's not, it's not as fast as we would like,
but as Fiona says, they have open work rights
and they can support themselves. Mm-hmm.
I don't think back can that any further, Phil?
So I might just move on to Ricardo
and then, um, if there's any other general Sure.
I'm on general now. Great. Cool. Yep.
Um, I know we talked a little bit about deportations,
but how many deportation liability notices mm-hmm.
That you issued in the year in review
and how does this compare to Yeah,
Steve's back. Thank
you.
Right at your fingertips. Uh, Steve,
There's A lot tables of numbers.
Okay. Maybe We can get it.
No, if you wouldn't mind just searching while
I move on to a second style.
Um, related to this, have you found
that there are systemic challenges
to issuing deportation liability notice notices physically?
Do you have any information on
how many deportation liability notices you haven't been able
to put forward because you do not have a fiscal address?
Um, so I'll go back to the, I'll have to come back
to you on the, on the, the data.
I have the number of deportations,
but we haven't gone the next step down to,
Would you be able to address my second question then?
You certainly, yeah. Yeah. So have you found
that there's a systemic issue with not being able
to issue deportation liability notices Ally,
because you do not have the physical address?
No, I, I, I'm not aware of any, any problems there.
There will be some, um, where we don't know where the,
but part of the investigation process
before we serve the deportation liability notice,
we do a significant amount of research to try
and locate the person
And so on, on most accounts, you're able to locate people
through physically
and being able to then issue
that the petition liability notice.
Um, there's a, our, our, it's quite hard question
to answer, but our active cases are the priority cases
we have a lot of information on.
There are, um, as you'll be aware, uh, an estimate
of about 20,000 unlawful people in New Zealand.
We don't know where all of those people are, but they,
but then they don't all meet the priority.
So we have a bunch of priority cases that we're,
are assigned based on the priorities I explained earlier.
And those are the ones that we actively work on,
and we generally have able to locate those people.
You, you seem to make remarks earlier that did not seem
to be a big problem for you yet.
Um, the minister is moving ahead with changes
that would allow for the petition liability notice
to be issued electronically if it is not a problem.
Uh, what do you think issuing the petition liability notices
electronically will actually solve? Well,
I'll, I'll pass them on policy colleague,
but I think it's just a,
the electronic service documents is, is a natural evolution
of, of how businesses operate generally. Yeah.
Well that, that's a, I think it's sort of recognizing
that the way that we can get in touch
with people is now broader.
So let's add this into the, the, into the toolkit and,
and that ability to
Thank you. But the policy
intents
and the communications from the press release
and the beehive specifically talks about
how this is about addresses that cannot be found physically,
ophthalm much less, I guess modernizing how we communicate.
You're telling me that there does not seem
to be a systemic issue with the inability
to locate addresses
and put those liability notices? I think,
No, I think Steve's talking about, can you clarify like
high range where he's actually activating the notice?
Yes, that's right. Yeah. But, you know,
electronically is way more efficient
and we hope that more people will go
earlier of their own volition.
What power powers do you get given
or are, what things are you able to do once you hand, uh,
the partition liability notice?
Well, the per the person then becomes liable
for deportation and there's an appeal period,
in which case they can, uh, they can just go
through the legal, the legal process.
And once, um, once that the, the process is completed,
um, there's a, we've just go
worked through their options with them.
Voluntary departure, in some cases, enforced departure, um,
or, or whatever, whatever the outcome of the appeal is. So,
And that includes the tension right?
Can include detention? Yes.
So would it be correct to say
that issuing the petition liability notices electronically
would allow you to, to move towards the tension quicker
as opposed to if you had to do the work
of locating an address, et cetera, and physically handed?
No, I would say I, I
would, I would say that's not correct.
I would say that it allows us to,
to serve the deportation liability.
Notice the question of detention
and the question of the next steps is very much based on the
humanitarian interview that would then take place the,
the case management process.
It's not a, there's a lot that happens between
the initial service of the document and,
and detention, which still.
Thank you. And just, um, last couple subs,
do you have any information showing whether, um,
undocumented migrants
or known as their, are more likely
to be criminals than the rest of the population?
I, I don't have any information on that at all,
and certainly not some,
not an assumption that we work under.
Cool. Appreciate it. Thank you.
All right. Have one last one
You can, Uh, anything to report on the, um,
Cause community organization development scheme?
Well, you'll be aware that the outcomes evaluation has
been done and been published.
Um, we are in the midst of, you know, providing advice
to ministers on what the options for next steps are,
but there's nothing further.
I can go on that.
Okay. Thank you. Any final questions?
Do you want any closing remarks?
Uh, anything
that you felt we hadn't covered that you wanted to share?
Otherwise we can close
It. Three hours has been great.
I'm very happy
you'll never, we'll never get it back.
It appears we have one final question
from Carl for the last one,
I just wanna take the opportunity chair if it's
appropriate for us to, um, thank Alison, thank you
All the work that you've done
and the support you've given the committee. Yeah.
And actually thank you for that, Kyle.
'cause I made a note at the start to say that at the end.
I, you've done it. So appreciate. Thank you.
Pick that up and have that on the, um, on the transcript.
Thank you. And just to add, to thank the committee, not
for everything, but certainly it is given us an opportunity.
My team have come such a long way. Yeah.
In five years and they've done such
incredible work for New Zealand.
And actually you've given me a chance
to showcase it when actually surprisingly the media don't
often pick up on it, really.
Oh, you feel our thank you.
We do appreciate the time and,
and the challenge, uh, as well.
So thank you. Thank, cheers. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thanks all. Um, will just go on private session
before we take a break, so, um.